PRAISE FOR MICHAEL HARNER AND THE WAY OF THE SHAMAN “What Yogananda did for Hinduism and D. T. Suzuki did for Zen, Michael Harner has done for shamanism—namely, bring the tradition and its richness to Western awareness. Michael Harner is widely acknowledged as the world’s foremost authority on experiential and practical shamanism, and has had an enormous influence on both the academic and lay worlds.” —from Higher Wisdom, by Roger Walsh and Charles S. Grob “Wonderful, fascinating.… Harner really knows what he’s talking about.” —Carlos Castaneda “An intimate and practical guide to the art of shamanic healing and the technology of the sacred. Michael Harner is not just an anthropologist who has studied shamanism; he is an authentic white shaman.” —Stanislav Grof, author of The Adventure of Self Discovery “Harner has impeccable credentials, both as an academic and as a practicing shaman. Without doubt (since the recent death of Mircea Eliade) the world’s leading authority on shamanism.” —Nevill Drury, author of The Elements of Shamanism Michael Harner’s Related Books The Way of the Shaman Hallucinogens and Shamanism The Jívaro: People of the Sacred Waterfalls Copyright © 2013 by the Foundation for Shamanic Studies, Inc. All rights reserved. No portion of this book, except for brief review or short quotation, may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise—without the written permission of the publisher. For information contact North Atlantic Books. Published by North Atlantic Books P.O. Box 12327 Berkeley, California 94712 Cover collage by Claudia Smelser. Cave photo © ollirg/Shutterstock.com. The nebula is from a Hubble image of a small region within M17, also known as Omega or Swan Nebula; it was obtained from NASA’s John Glenn Image Gallery. Cover design by Claudia Smelser Cave and Cosmos: Shamanic Encounters with Another Reality is sponsored by the Society for the Study of Native Arts and Sciences, a nonprofit educational corporation whose goals are to develop an educational and cross-cultural perspective linking various scientific, social, and artistic fields; to nurture a holistic view of arts, sciences, humanities, and healing; and to publish and distribute literature on the relationship of mind, body, and nature. North Atlantic Books’ publications are available through most bookstores. For further information, visit our website at www.northatlanticbooks.com or call 800-733-3000. MEDICAL DISCLAIMER: The following information is intended for general information purposes only. Individuals should always see their health care provider before administering any suggestions made in this book. Any application of the material set forth in the following pages is at the reader’s discretion and is his or her sole responsibility. Information on the Foundation for Shamanic Studies, a nonprofit incorporated public 501(c)(3) charitable and educational organization, may be found at its website: www.shamanism.org. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Harner, Michael J. Cave and cosmos : shamanic encounters with another reality / by Michael Harner. p. cm. Includes bibliographical references (p. ). eISBN: 978-1-58394564-3 1. Shamanism. 2. Spirits. I. Title. BF1999.H37517 2013 201..44—dc23 2012022873 v3.1 To My Wife, Sandra Harner, a Rose Constant and True To My Children And to All Those Who Have Worked to Save the Ancient Knowledge All royalties from this book go to the Foundation for Shamanic Studies, a nonprofit, incorporated public (501)(c)(3) charitable and educational organization dedicated to the preservation, study, and transmission of shamanic knowledge for the welfare of the planet and its inhabitants. The shamanic way of healing presented in this book should not be considered as an exclusive method of confronting medical problems. It should be viewed as an adjunct to orthodox medical or psychological treatment, unless contrary medical advice is given. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS First, I wish to express my gratitude to the thousands of students who contributed shamanic-ascension and other kinds of experiences to the archives of the Shamanic Knowledge Conservatory (SKC) of the Foundation for Shamanic Studies. This book would have been impossible without their help. I especially thank those whose experiences were drawn from the SKC archives in recent years for the Celestia Study. A lifetime of acknowledgments almost book length in themselves is due to the multitude of persons and peoples who helped me on the long path to Cave and Cosmos. To be practical, however, I reluctantly restrict myself now to expressing my thanks for assistance received by the Foundation primarily during the last half-decade or so for various purposes, including staffing, indigenous assistance, the SKC, and work on this book. Of immense importance has been the generous help of my longtime friends and supporters Dr. Baron A.M.F. and Dr. Melinda C. Maxfield (the Maxfield Foundation), without whom this book would not have been possible. Equally important has been the generosity of Betsy Gordon, Dr. Angeles Arrien, and the foundations carrying their names. I gratefully thank them. I thank also the members of the Board of Trustees of the Foundation for their steadfast support, donation of time, and wise counsel. In recent years they have included Dr. Maxfield, Robert Lee Morris, Dr. Frances E. Vaughan, Ralph M. Field, Heather Burch, and Dr. Jeffrey David Ehrenreich, besides the three officers of the Foundation: Susan Mokelke, Sandra Harner, and me. Other major supporters of the Foundation and its work during these years include Bokara Legendre and the Tara Fund, Elizabeth Marshall, Edgar Brown, Della Clark, Don Ensslin, the Estate of Margaret Cohan, the Fetzer Institute, the Frank Pace Jr. Foundation, Alicia L. Gates, the John Fetzer Memorial Trust, Susan Mokelke, Robert Lee Morris, Claudia Kuntze, the Shared Vision Charitable Foundation, the Sterling Fund, the Community Foundation for Greater Atlanta, John and Jessica Schairer, the Seattle Foundation, and the Flow Fund Circle. Numerous others—too many to list here—also helped through their donations, their support as faculty members or as members of the Circle of the Foundation, or in other capacities. I thank them all with deep gratitude. Two remarkable persons in particular must also be recognized. One is the Foundation’s vice president, Sandra Harner—my wife, adviser, editor, cheerleader, critic, and partner in our shamanic adventures for half a century—who has supported and participated in this endeavor with a patience and modesty I have long admired. This book would not exist without her. The other is Susan Mokelke, whose electronic sophistication, generosity, creativity, and tireless work as executive director of the Foundation for Shamanic Studies have been essential to give me time to complete the book. She also assisted with the numerous details involved in its final preparation for publication. I give my immense thanks to Noelle Burch, who for years has done the vital work of at least two persons at the headquarters of the Foundation with remarkable efficiency and grace. Over a span of years, former research associate Gizelle Rhyon Berry did excellent and essential work organizing the archives of the SKC for the Mapping of Nonordinary Reality (MONOR) project. Coleen Judson for a time was able to follow up her work. I also thank Louis G. Leeburg, James Harner, and Carolyn Fee for their efforts on behalf of the Foundation. I express my great appreciation of the Foundation’s excellent faculty members, all experienced shamanic practitioners as well as teachers, now led by Susan Mokelke. They are too numerous to list here, but I must express my gratitude to fellow anthropologist Bill Brunton, editor emeritus of our journal, Shamanism, who until retirement was always ready to undertake important international missions for the Foundation despite hazards to his health. I must also honor another faculty member and anthropologist, the inimitable late Heimo Lappalainen, for his pioneering work on behalf of the Foundation in Siberia and Central Asia, and especially for his role in the success of the 1993 FSS expedition to Tuva. I honor that pillar of strength, generosity, ability, and modesty, Paul Uccusic, the FSS director for Europe, who has been responsible, with the help of his wife, Roswitha Uccusic, for the evolution of a remarkable multinational faculty. His work, including in the Central Asian country of Tuva, has strengthened the Foundation on both sides of the world. Others who deserve acknowledgment for their overseas educational work on behalf of the FSS include Alicia L. Gates in Latin America and Spain, and Kevin Turner in Asia. By acknowledging some, I know I have failed to acknowledge others equally deserving of appreciation. I only ask that the many of you who have helped make this book possible in a multitude of ways realize that in my eighties I may not recall at this moment everyone deserving of remembrance. I do remember, however, those whose vision and support were vital in the very first years of the Foundation. They include Norman and Michael Benzie, Dorothy S. Lyddon and her daughter Martha, David Corbin, Nan Moss, David Rockefeller, Jr., and the ever-young, far-seeing, and courageous Laurance S. Rockefeller. Finally, I gratefully acknowledge the invitation to publish with North Atlantic Books given me by its founder, Richard Grossinger, and I also express my appreciation to Doug Reil, Kathy Glass, and the rest of the staff there. Finally, I salute and thank my truly outstanding editor at North Atlantic Books, Wendy Taylor. Her professionalism and consideration have been a great gift. After this book went to press, I received from fellow anthropologist William Lyon a copy of his new work, Spirit Talkers. I wish to acknowledge him for making a parallel case that spirits should be taken seriously. CONTENTS Cover Other Books by This Author Title Page Copyright Dedication Acknowledgments List of Abbreviations Preface Introduction 1. Spirit Power and the Cave 2. We Exist! The Spirits Call for Recognition 3. The Search 4. Our World: Shamans and Spirits 5. The Journey to Other Worlds 6. The Westerners’ First Journeys: The Lower World and Power Animals 7. Shamanic Ascension: History, Folklore, and Knowledge 8. Drumming over the Rainbow: Westerners Ascend to the Upper World 9. Teachers—Compassionate Spirits Who Advise 10. Teachers—Compassionate Spirits Who Heal 11. Cosmic Dismemberment, Union, and Healing Power 12. Spirits, Heavens, and Spiritual Freedom Afterword: The Cave Again Appendix A: Ascending to the Upper World to Compare Experiences Appendix B: Descending to the Lower World to Compare Experiences Appendix C: Resources for Training Appendix D: Core Shamanism and Healing: Information for Physicians and Health Professionals (written with Sandra Harner, PhD) Contributors to the Celestia Study Notes Bibliography About the Author Picture Insert ABBREVIATIONS CSS Center for Shamanic Studies FSS Foundation for Shamanic Studies OR Ordinary Reality MONOR Mapping of Nonordinary Reality (project) NOR Nonordinary Reality OSC Ordinary State of Consciousness SSC Shamanic State of Consciousness UMR Unpublished MONOR Report PREFACE When still a professor of anthropology at the Graduate Faculty of the New School for Social Research, I taught a seminar in which graduate students learned to do shamanic journeying in order to understand better the experiences of indigenous shamans. Each week the seminar participants were assigned the task of making a shamanic journey at home while listening to a journeying drumming tape, and writing a report on their experiences. The second week, after doing her first homework assignment, a quiet young businesswoman, who had enrolled in the seminar only because its hours fit into her schedule, timidly raised her hand. She asked, more as an observation than a question, “Dr. Harner, we aren’t ever going to be the same again, are we?” She was probably right. INTRODUCTION Since the appearance of my last book, The Way of the Shaman, more than three decades ago, my teaching has been primarily oral, in keeping with the age-old traditions of shamanism. The time has come, however, for me finally to address publicly certain questions that urgently deserve wider attention in the contemporary world. Two fundamental questions are whether there is more than one reality and whether we need to be alone in solving the challenges of existence. This book tells the stories of some of the thousands of Westerners who found answers to such questions using the ancient methods of shamans, including drumming “over the rainbow” to discover amazing heavenly realms waiting to help them. They also found a new spiritual freedom, a freedom to know, and no longer just to believe or disbelieve. The late, great scholar of comparative religion Mircea Eliade emphasized that shamans are unique in the world’s spiritual traditions due to their ability to fly to other worlds, including heavens. They reached those worlds in what he called a state of “ecstasy,” or an altered state of consciousness. This state was achieved, he said, “through the musical magic of the drum” that permitted the shaman to “reach the highest heaven.”1 Little more was said, however, about the nature of that “musical magic.” Drums are everywhere in photographs of Siberian shamans, particularly famous for those flights out of this world. Those drums, many scholars suggested, were used just for “theatrical effect” in shamanic sessions, and some even claimed that Siberian shamans did not change their consciousness at all. Others, following mycologist Gordon Wasson, believed that the ingestion of the psychoactive mushroom Amanita muscaria was really responsible for the Siberian shamans’ belief that they flew to other worlds. The ubiquity of the drums in those photographs aroused my curiosity, and in the late 1960s I started experimenting with drumming to see if it had an effect in making those magical flights. After various experiments, I was excited to conclude that a steady rhythm of 205 to 220 beats per minute worked perfectly to change consciousness and, with knowledge of shamanism, to make flights or journeys to spirit worlds.2 This is “auditory driving,” or “sonic driving,” an entirely drug-free and classic method of the shaman. In response to requests, my personal practice with the drum led me to teach small groups how to use drumming to change consciousness not only to visit other worlds, but also to bring shamanic help and healing into our daily lives. Demand for this knowledge grew, and in 1979 my wife Sandra Harner and I started the Center for Shamanic Studies (now the Foundation for Shamanic Studies) as a vehicle for teaching shamanism. At that time, I also experimented with making shamanic.drumming recordings so that people could journey without a live drum. (It should be noted that the practice of making shamanic journeys in itself does not make one a shaman, but such a practice is a very useful step toward learning and practicing shamanism, for through journeying one can learn directly and rapidly from the spirits.) Then in 1980 I published The Way of the Shaman, a book that started the worldwide shamanic revival.3 Through personal fieldwork and training with surviving tribal shamans starting more than half a century ago, as well as through my own shamanic practice and by reading reports on hundreds of cultures, I discovered, learned, experimented with, and revived a variety of shamanic practices. From these I originated “core shamanism”—those universal, near-universal, and common features of shamanism, together with journeys to other worlds, a distinguishing feature of shamanism—as a teaching methodology to bring shamanism to contemporary life. It includes the implicit, if not indigenously explicit, recognition of two realities, ordinary and nonordinary, the latter usually entered by a change into what I call the shamanic state of consciousness, which has a learned aspect and differing degrees of depth. Today, using core shamanism and auditory driving, tens of thousands of persons worldwide are now able, like traditional Siberian shamans, to enter another reality to travel to other worlds as well as to work here in this world to provide healings and other shamanic help. (For those new to core shamanism, see Appendix D for more detailed information.) For more than a quarter of a century, we have sponsored a project at the Foundation for Shamanic Studies that involves collecting and archiving shamanic knowledge, including almost five thousand reports by Westerners about what they found in their shamanic journeys into nonordinary reality—what have been called “journeys outside of time.” The term “Westerners” is used simply as a term of convenience to cover present-day Americans (the largest group having unpublished records in the Foundation’s archives), Canadians, and some Europeans. This “Western” collection, which serves as the main source of this book’s reports, is unique in the world. It is part of the Mapping of Nonordinary Reality (MONOR) project and belongs to the Foundation for Shamanic Studies Shamanic Knowledge Conservatory in Northern California, which also has a collection of publications on indigenous shamanism for hundreds of societies worldwide.4 For years I have been loath to publish this knowledge prematurely, for fear that once it was “out there,” it might deprive new students and other Westerners from having uninfluenced, autonomous experiences. Now, however, through the Foundation’s oral teachings in training courses and workshops as much as anything, “the word is out.” To avoid “contamination” of experiences by excessive advance communication regarding what others have experienced (thereby preventing truly novel and spontaneous journeys to the unknown), the Shamanic Knowledge Conservatory no longer accepts new Western experiential shamanic reports, and it seems the time has come to unveil a small sample of these discoveries through publication here. The Westerners whose experiences are in this book made ascensions to what many scholars of shamanism call the Upper World and descents to the Lower World, as contrasted with the one in which we live, which is the Middle World. The worlds above and below are entirely in nonordinary reality, and they are solely spirit realms, while the one we live in has both its ordinary-reality aspect, the one we easily perceive, and its nonordinary aspect, which is a domain of spirits and is less easily perceived without shamanic training. The Upper World is quite different from the ordinary-reality phenomena above us, the phenomena observed by astronomers. Even the most distant galaxies of our universe are still not the Upper World of the shamans. The Westerners, in descending to the Lower World, were likewise not going down the rock layers of the geologists’ Earth but were passing into a purely spirit realm below us, one without earthly limitations. This book provides examples of nonordinary Western experiences in all three worlds, with the main emphasis being on the Upper World, partially because today in the West there seems to be great curiosity about what, if anything, is “up there” spiritually. In other words, are heavens real, fantasy, or metaphorical? Our evidence suggests that the answer depends upon which of two realities, ordinary or nonordinary, one is talking about. In nonordinary reality—accessed with classic shamanic techniques, including auditory driving—there now seems to be no question of the existence of heavens, celestial choirs, deities, and the presence of beings, or spirits, in the Upper World. Evidence is also presented for the existence of spirits in our own world, the Middle World. The ascension-derived evidence in this book challenges the beliefs of those who claim that there is only one heaven and that round-trips there are restricted to a few long-dead prophets, saints, and founders of Great Religions. Evenhandedly, the reports also challenge the beliefs of those atheists and “secular fundamentalists” who think that heavens are figments of the imagination. Even in Christianity today, some members of the clergy suggest that heaven is a feeling rather than a place. Years ago in The Way of the Shaman I gave Westerners an introduction to making shamanic journeys to the Lower World, and many have traveled there during the past three decades. That is one of the reasons I do not place as much emphasis in the present book on the Lower World as on the Upper. Still, the final chapter of Cave and Cosmos provides new and surprising information about what some Westerners have discovered in the Lower World. As the cosmographic reports contained in this book are important contributions to shamanic knowledge in and of themselves, I do not attempt in the limited space here to make comparisons to the accounts of near-death survivors, nor to the firsthand journey experiences of indigenous shamans, the latter being surprisingly scarce. I recognize the importance of these and other comparative studies and urge that they be undertaken. The work in your hands is intended, among other things, to encourage just such investigations. I wish to add that in this book I am not trying to bridge disciplines. I am an anthropologist, a shamanologist, a practitioner of shamanism and, in the case of this book, a cosmographer of Western shamanic experiences. Nothing more. Those who wish to reconcile shamanism with another discipline—for example, psychology—should try to resist the immediate temptation, as in Casablanca, to “round up the usual suspects,” the standard reductionist tools. I have nothing against reduction-ism per se, but in my opinion it should only follow true mastery of any field being “reduced.” In the case of shamanism, it should include mastery of shamanism from extensive firsthand experience, experimentation, and study, in addition to a comparable mastery of whatever field is being compared. Admittedly this is not an easy task … but when was serious scholarship ever easy?5 Considerable care was taken over the years during workshops and courses to teach the Westerners studying core shamanism how to go to other worlds without giving them more than minimal directions. Detailed information on the instructions they received can be found in Appendices A and B. There you are invited to use the same shamanic journey methods yourself to compare your own experiences with those described here. However, the appendices are not intended to form a “how-to” book, but rather to be an opportunity for readers to test the reality and nature of the discoveries made by Westerners in the Upper World (and to a lesser extent the Lower World) that are reported in these pages.Once you have read this book, you unfortunately will no longer be naïve about what to expect if you ascend to the Upper World or descend to the Lower. Even so, if you accept the above invitation, be prepared for some amazing discoveries, including the discovery that you yourself will no longer be dependent on others’ reports of what is there or not. With core shamanism, some of the ironclad cosmological dogmas of church, state, and science may be expected to rust away. As I write this, I am now eighty-three years old. Much of what I have learned about shamanism in the last half century has long since been evaluated and internalized into a personal body of knowledge that I’ve passed on to others orally in many talks with footnotes of remembrance lost in the sands of time. Portions of this book embody talks I gave to my students and to the public over the course of more than three decades. However, one of the safeguards in reading my statements about shamanism is that serious readers can experientially test most of my statements through their own shamanic work. Central to what I offer in these pages are new data and ways to verify them. If you find that parts of the book remind you of something you have read or heard elsewhere, do not be surprised, for I have personally taught the principles and methods of shamanism and shamanic journeying to thousands of students. Some of them have already published portions of my oral teachings,6 but not the new data presented here. Bringing shamanism back to the West includes encouraging you, the reader, to become more confident of your own spiritual authority. I wish to encourage your spiritual autonomy even in reading this book. Although I could not restrain myself from some personal comments regarding certain of these Westerners’ reports, others are purposely presented with few or no remarks to foster your own independent thinking.We have had enough people speaking on pulpits and before congregations of one religion or another, repeating or analyzing to exhaustion the same old stories regarding the experiences of founders of Great Religions. Now it is time for you to avail yourself of the opportunity to have such experiences of your own. In that connection, the reports here, however interesting, are not a substitute for the real thing: your own firsthand experiences. Likewise, this book is not intended as a traditional scholarly tome addressed primarily to an academic audience but is an effort to inspire readers to new heights, literally, by exposing them to new data and concepts. I see the new information presented here—i.e., the records of others’ experiences and the inspiration they may provide—as my main task and contribution in this volume. The Foundation’s archives have been combed for examples of a wide range of experiences that, while nonordinary, are within the range of possibility and potential for all of us. Together with the tenets of core shamanism just outlined, these accounts—vital perspectives on our situation as human beings— constitute a package that can broaden the horizons of interested readers. I have chosen to spend my limited time to put information into this book that I feel is really important, even urgent, to pass on to a fractious and perilous world willing to quarrel interminably about spiritual matters on the basis of belief in old stories. The shaman’s way is that of firsthand knowledge, not of stories (even mine!), and in many indigenous cultures the shaman is “one who knows.” I hope that readers will find this book useful in helping them lessen their dependence on the cosmological dogmas of organized religion and science. I hope you are encouraged, or further encouraged, in your own shamanic encounters with another reality, for there we can find incredible compassion, help, and healing that we badly need in our world. In a way, this is a data-oriented declaration of spiritual independence, and an invitation to use that knowledge and freedom to bring more wisdom, compassion, and joy into your life and the lives of others. —Michael Harner Autumn 2012 1 Spirit Power and the Cave POWER In February 1957, a small band of Shuar (Jívaro) men and I became lost after trekking for weeks through mountainous Upper Amazon rainforest. Tired, disoriented, and hungry, we finally ran into a friendly group of Shuar hunters who told us that we had been going in exactly the wrong direction. They shared a bit of their provisions and pointed the way toward the Shuar neighborhood we sought. Leaving the hunters, we soon came to a small but raging river, fed by recent rainstorms in the Andes to the west. This was an obstacle to our further progress, so we waited for several days for the waters to go down, without luck. My companions waited quietly and seemed unperturbed by the situation while I became increasingly impatient, for I knew it was possible to construct rafts of balsa logs and to get across using makeshift guadua bamboo paddles. Several times I proposed to my companions that we should wait no longer for the water to recede but instead make rafts and paddle over to the other side. Repeatedly they declined to do so. Growing increasingly impatient, I finally challenged my companions, pointing out that they called themselves great warriors but were unwilling to cross the river. Without comment, they shortly constructed three balsa log rafts, and we prepared to make the crossing. The river was about 150 feet across, and the first raft, paddled by two of the Indians and carrying some of our baggage, made it to the other side. Then I went on the second raft with two paddlers. We made it about three-quarters of the way across and then were swept down into the rapids where the raft overturned, dumping us into the raging torrent. With extreme effort we were able to swim the remaining distance and survive. The third raft made it across. As we collected ourselves and rested before hiking farther, I remarked to them, “That was a pretty close call. I guess we are lucky to be alive.” I was expecting some agreement, at least tacitly, but my companions silently remained standing there like stereotypes of stoical Indian warriors. They gave the impression that this had been nothing, acting completely unfazed. Their lack of reaction perplexed me, because these were the same men who were reluctant to cross the river despite my urging. So I undiplomatically pointed out that they had not wanted to make the river crossing, and now they were acting as if it were nothing, even though they had been afraid to cross. They exchanged glances with each other but said nothing. Then one of them, whom I knew particularly well, finally replied. He said, “Well, you see, we were not really afraid to cross the river because we cannot die. But we did not know about you!” At that moment, the perilous Amazon river crossing opened a door to important spiritual knowledge. After that I gradually learned from the Shuar that they were protected by spirit power against all forms of death except epidemic disease. I also learned that such power can leave one. Thus unprotected, people do indeed die. Therefore, before leaving on precarious missions, people watched for signs as to whether they still possessed the protective powers provided by their guardian spirits. If the signs were negative, they did not depart on such a mission, especially if it involved an attack on an enemy. Like the Shuar, indigenous shamans worldwide know that spirit power is basic to one’s health, survival, and ability to heal others. Without this power, one is not resistant to illness or misfortune. In traditional shamanic cultures this awareness permeates the daily life of virtually everyone.Jaime de Angulo, who spent time with the Atsugewe people of Northern California in the early twentieth century, said it well: “Without power you cannot do anything out of the ordinary. With power you can do anything.”1 The power is like a force field that permeates the shaman and permits him or her to use the power to help and heal others. The shaman’s idea of power is similar to our concept of energy, yet it includes more: energy as well as intelligence and self-confidence. Spiritual power is not political power or power over others. It is power essential to one’s health and ability to survive. SPIRITS At this point let me explain what I mean by a “spirit.” As I have said elsewhere, a spirit can be defined as “an animate essence that has intelligence and different degrees of power, that is seen most easily in complete darkness and much less frequently in bright light, and in an altered state of consciousness better than an ordinary state. In fact, there is some question whether you can see it in an ordinary state of consciousness at all.”2 In other words, not all spirits have significant power. Those spirits that do are often referred to by shamanic peoples simply as “powers.” Particularly important in indigenous cultures are the guardian spirits that provide protective power to the people they love.3 When properly invoked by a shaman, such a power also provides active healing assistance for curing illness and pain in the shaman’s patients. Through experience, the shaman has learned which spirits are powerful. Power is acquired in different ways. In Siberia and parts of South America it was common to gain personal power after suffering from a severe illness that put someone at death’s door. If that person suddenly had a miraculous recovery, the local community concluded that a spirit had compassion for the person and interceded to relieve him or her of the illness. In such an event, people in the community typically would go to the revived and cured patient to see if the healing power could be used to help another individual suffering from a malady, usually a similar one. In other words, the suffering of the ill person could evoke pity by a spirit. In this way, a shaman sometimes was created. SEEKING SPIRIT POWER Ideally, one should not wait to become ill to aspire to gain this power. Members of traditional shamanic cultures understood this well and encouraged young people in good health to suffer voluntarily in order that ancestral spirits might intervene to help them by sharing their power. Much more than a healing energy, this power was seen as a force that would support people in daily life, helping them to avoid misfortune and hardship, and to achieve good outcomes. Most famously, this acquisition of power occurred in the power quest, more commonly called the “vision quest.” It should be mentioned, however, that not all successful power quests involved achieving visions. For example, among the Southern Okanagan of Washington State, the seeker might not see the spirit but instead receive its power through an auditory experience, such as a song and words.4 Most power quests were not something to be done by a sick person, but by one who was healthy and often relatively young. In a sense, it was a kind of spiritual life insurance to further an individual’s success and survival. Spirit power could usually be sought by almost anyone in a variety of isolated places where ancestral and other guardians were known to reside. Such sites include mountaintops, the depths of a cave, a remote waterfall, the Arctic wilderness, particular canyons, local burial sites or ruins, a remote trail, and other locations. But one thing remained constant for success: the spirits had to be convinced that a power-seeking visitor to their haunts deserved help. When arriving at such a place, the visitor would usually sing or silently speak to the spirits there, asking for their assistance. SUFFERING VOLUNTARILY TO EVOKE COMPASSIONATE HELP The quest took various forms. Regardless of culture, it commonly required seekers to prove themselves by suffering voluntarily, such as from fear, hunger, thirst, extreme cold or heat, and exhaustion. In shamanism, suffering is not a method of atoning for one’s “sins,” but a way of attracting the help of powerful spirits. Among some Inuit of the Arctic, one way to have a successful quest for power was to spend four or five days in a special isolated igloo in the depths of winter without food or water. When the specified time elapsed, an elder, usually a shaman, opened the igloo and brought the person home. The igloo did not have even an oil lamp to heat it, so the suffering from extreme cold was combined with suffering from lack of water and food. It is reported that in some cases the person seeking power might be naked during this time of questing. A less life-challenging example is my own power quest among the Shuar that involved an exhausting climb up the forested eastern slopes of the Andes, a near-freezing bath at a waterfall, and no solid food allowed prior to obtaining a vision helped by the overwhelming power of datura (Brugmansia sp.) juice.5 Voluntary suffering for such power sometimes still occurs among Native American peoples of the Great Plains of North America, where the person seeking a vision and power typically first becomes dehydrated in the purification or “sweat” lodge. There the individual will intentionally suffer from the extreme heat and may even start becoming aware of spirit appearances and manifestations. Afterward, the seeker goes to an isolated mountaintop accompanied by a shaman-priest (medicine man) and/or other elders. The individual is left all alone for a prearranged number of days, and then the elders return to retrieve the person from the mountaintop. In the more extreme form of the Plains vision or power quest, the seeker would be wrapped in a blanket or quilt and placed in the ground in an L-shaped hole that had already been constructed and used previously. The vision seeker’s sacred pipe was included. The hole would then be covered to reduce light so that the person would be better able to have visionary experiences both day and night, and to increase suffering through isolation, sensory deprivation, and cold. The suffering was heightened by not being allowed to drink water at any time after the sweat lodge or during the quest. The suffering is normally accompanied by praying to the ancestors, “Have pity on me,” usually addressing them as “grandfathers” since among indigenous peoples in the Upper Amazon and the North American Plains, “grandfathers” tends to be a gloss for all ancestors, because in many shamanic cultures there is no special word for ancestors. Once again, the suffering is intended to evoke compassion by the ancestral spirits so they may provide visionary experiences that bestow spiritual power on the supplicant. In revealing themselves, they may appear in either animal or human form. Why should those ancestor spirits provide help? The answer is really simple: when leaving ordinary reality at the time of death, they have chosen to remain here in the Middle World in order to help their genealogical descendants or allies of their descendants. When properly evoked, and convinced that a visitor deserves help, these spirits will reveal themselves in the forms the beings choose, communicate, and lend power to help the pilgrim overcome the difficulties and dangers of life. I often call them quasi-compassionate ethnocentric spirits, or simply ethnocentric spirits. Their protective compassion is conditional in two main ways: (1) they tend to help their descendants as long as they themselves are remembered and honored; and (2) they can be highly vengeful against those who threaten their descendants or allies of their descendants. ANOTHER WAY OF SEEKING POWER: SPIRIT ATTRACTION There is a different way to acquire spirit power that does not involve suffering or pleas for compassion. I call this “spirit attraction.” In the process of calling and working with spirits, shamans often ingest foods or drinks liked by their peoples or by certain animals. The shamanic purpose is to attract and even merge with a helping spirit and its power. Thus, Siberian and Mongolian shamans pray and drink vodka to entice vodka-loving ancestral spirits (often of deceased shaman relatives) to merge with them. Northwest Coast shamans may pray and eat salmon to attract the spirits of bear, bald eagle, and “the Indian.” We will return to this subject. WALTER CLINE AND OKANAGAN CLUES An American anthropology student working his way on a tramp steamer in the late 1920s jumped into the sea near the North African coast. His name was Walter Cline. He swam to shore hoping to live with the Berbers, which he did. He became fluent in Arabic, living in Morocco, Syria, Ethiopia, and Arabia, and he helped in archaeological excavations at Thebes in Egypt. In 1936 he received a PhD in anthropology from Harvard. During those Depression years he held a temporary job with the federal Works Progress Administration in north-central Washington State, interviewing Okanagan Indian elders about their traditional knowledge and disappearing culture, including their former cave power quests.In the early 1950s he taught at the University of California in Berkeley as a part-time lecturer on “primitive religion.” Cline was an enthusiastic and inspiring teacher. I felt privileged to be his student during the last two years of his life while he was dying of cancer, an illness that had already cost him one of his arms. He and his remarkable wife, Marjorie, scraped out a living by selling used anthropological books and monographs from their apartment. Despite their meager income, the two of them frequently visited western North American Indian peoples and returned with incredible stories, often involving shamans, that he told his classes. Unlike most of his other colleagues at that time, Cline did not attempt to explain away shamanism from a psychological point of view. The students loved, even revered him, for he brought to their lives an unparalleled kindness, openness, and enthusiasm for anthropology made all the more remarkable by the fact that he was at death’s door. He awakened my first interest in shamanism. Walter Cline was a modest man, so it was not until two decades after his death, when I had long since been teaching anthropology myself, that I accidentally discovered that he had contributed to a little-known publication on the Sinkaietk or Southern Okanagan Indian people of the Columbia River Plateau.6 With some difficulty, I finally obtained a copy. In it was limited but important power quest information that he had gathered from tribal elders. Cline focused on power quests undertaken by small children, reportedly boys, who sought generalized power to help them with their future lives.7 He learned of an instance where a father lowered his son into a cave for an overnight stay to gain power.8 WILLARD PARK AND PAVIOTSO POWER QUESTS In addition to the clues in Walter Cline’s reports about the Okanagan, I found the writings of ethnologist Willard Park especially valuable, for he had learned that the cave power quest was important to shamans among the Paviotso (Northern Paiute) people in Nevada, whom he interviewed in the early and mid-1930s.9 Park relates that Paviotso elders were emphatic about the necessity of strictly following certain traditional procedures for achieving success in such a quest.10 He said that Paviotso shamans took food with them on cave quests to acquire some specific additional powers, such as to improve the success of their healing work.11 This is consistent with the just-mentioned use of food in spirit attraction to acquire power.12 Here I wish to quote Park: There are no preparations for the power-quest. The man who seeks a vision does not fast either before he undertakes the quest or during his stay in the cave. Nor is the quest for power accompanied by self.torture or extended physical exertion. Late in the afternoon, the man who seeks power goes to a cave where he has heard it is possible to acquire power. Food for a midnight and a morning meal may be taken along.13 Park did not mention any spiritual reason for taking food into the cave, but my knowledge of spirit attraction caused me to take the Paviotso methods very seriously. When a cave was located for my own quest, I planned to take a sandwich containing several types of food favored by different types of animals. Sometimes the ancestral spirits seem willing to help a person who is a nondescendant, or even from another culture or race, if they feel that the person has helped or will help their descendants. This was something I learned among both the Shuar and the Conibo peoples of South America. Over many years I had tried to assist Native Americans in North America in various ways, such as at Wounded Knee in 1973.14 I hoped that this and some related efforts might count for me in a cave. THE CAVE A couple of years after writing The Way of the Shaman, I learned of a promising cave in the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia. Hoping I had enough information, I resolved to do a cave power quest there to seek a special shamanic healing power and to see what, if anything, happened without the help of consciousness-changing plants or auditory driving, since their use was not mentioned by Park or Cline. Finally on an evening in 1982 I approached the entrance of the cave alone, silently calling upon the spirits to have compassion for me and to confer greater power for my work in healing others. I used a flashlight to descend to a remote recess deep inside the cavern, which took about a quarter of an hour. There I extinguished the light. The darkness was thick and silent. Next, according to what I had learned, I was supposed to sleep until the middle of the night, wake up, eat a small amount of food, and not go back to sleep until something happened. After sitting for some time on the cold bedrock, I pushed the button on my wristwatch to see the faint luminescence of the time. It was about nine o’clock in the evening. Two hours had passed since I entered the cave. According to the information I had, no matter what happened, I should have no light until the night had fully passed. Then I could leave the cave, for one of the ancient rules was that the quester could emerge only after the dawn of the next day. Otherwise, it was better never to have entered the cave at all. There were other things I would also have to do before the night ended. Surrounded by dense darkness, I felt completely isolated from the land of the living. Two kinds of fear wrestled within me. The lesser fear was that nothing would happen during this solitary night underground. After all, I did not belong to the indigenous North American people west of the Rocky Mountains who had practiced this ancient method of obtaining specific spiritual powers. Perhaps it was too much to expect anything approaching their experiences without their cultural background or without the strong hallucinogens of the Shuar (Jívaro), used during my previous experiences. Besides, I thought, what kind of vision or power quest was this, where one did not fast beforehand and even was supposed to have a midnight snack? In other words, would spirit attraction work? The darkness, which had become reddish, felt like imminent death, silently and patiently waiting. My deeper fear was that I might die, alone in the interior of this gigantic rock tomb, a victim of my own presumptuousness. I knew from my vision quest by a waterfall in the Amazon years earlier that the spirits might do their utmost to frighten me and test my trust in them. In the Amazon, at least, there were my Shuar companions to protect me from fatal mistakes. For this quest in the cave, however, there were no living tutors. No one could be here with me. This was a completely solitary experiment—a gamble that I possessed enough information to succeed, and that the spirits were there and would help me. Eventually I crawled into my sleeping bag to try to fall asleep, the next step to be followed in the cave. Lying on the rock floor beside my head was a sandwich that I had brought to eat in the middle of the night. I reminded myself to awaken around midnight, hoping that I would not fail by sleeping through the night. Gradually fatigue overcame me, for a chronic back problem had made it an arduous and painful hike to the cave. My body wanted to rest. I fell asleep, still concerned that I might not be able to wake up near midnight.I need not have worried. I was shocked awake by a feathered wing gently brushing across my face. I felt an adrenaline rush of excitement. I pressed the button on my wristwatch. The faint numbers showed the time was two minutes before twelve. My astonishment at being awakened by the winged caress was accompanied by relief at being roused from my sleep in time to follow the midnight instructions. I groped for the sandwich, found it, and ate. I now planned to stay awake until something significant happened. I sat there, rested and fully conscious, alert to anything that might occur. About a quarter of an hour went by. Then half an hour passed. I was starting to feel disappointed. Perhaps nothing more was going to occur.15 Suddenly, from the direction of the distant entrance of the cavern, came the sound of hooves. The sound became louder; it was clearly a herd of animals. I could not believe what I was hearing. The noise of their galloping got closer and closer. This seemed impossible. Yet the sound became so great I had to cover my ears. Was I to be trampled to death? I crouched down. Then the thundering hooves swept past on both sides of me, rushing deeper into the cave and beyond. Although I could not see them, I heard them snorting as they galloped by. “We are Horse,” they said, in a communication like telepathy, but stronger. Then another, smaller herd followed fast upon them, their breathing and hoofbeats not quite as loud. “We are Bison,” they said. Then they were gone. The cave was silent again. I was ecstatic, truly ecstatic. Tears of joy and thanksgiving were running down my cheeks. It was a miracle. This was no dream, for I was still wide awake. Then, as I was sitting there, an immense indescribable power rushed toward me from the same direction that the herds had come. But this time, there was no sound, no warning. It swept overwhelmingly through my body like a freight train. A surge of immense energy filled my body. I was astonished. The power had come! Then the animal was gone. As it bounded soundlessly away through the darkness beyond the recesses of the cave, it called back to me: “I am XXX, XXX, XXX!” It said, “I am one and all. You and I are one.” Then there was only silence. I felt indescribable awe and gratitude. After a few minutes, and with some effort, I recalled the traditional shamanic knowledge of what was to be done now, and what was not to be done. I was to go to sleep again to receive a dream showing me how to use the newly acquired power. What I was not to do, until I was very, very old, was to reveal directly the identity of the animal power that penetrated me. I was too excited to feel sleepy, but I crawled back into the sleeping bag again and, after perhaps an hour, dozed off. Eventually I reawakened. Still in my sleeping bag, I slowly looked around. I sensed that I was not alone. The reddish darkness was as thick as ever, but it seemed nonetheless that I could see the largest wall of the cave. High on it, a life-size human image gradually appeared, as though faintly projected onto a movie screen. The image slowly became brighter until I could discern the form of a smiling slender young woman with long dark hair. She seemed vaguely familiar. I was perplexed. Who could this be? As if in answer, now her name was being faintly transmitted to me. First it seemed to be a name in English; and then, more strongly, it evolved into a somewhat similar.sounding name in an unknown language. I waited for the name to metamorphose again, since it did not seem like a real one. It was certainly not one I recognized. But it did not change. The name was the real and final name, she communicated. For a minute or two, she undulated slowly and sensuously in an enticing manner. Somehow I was wary of her unspoken invitation, for there was something menacing about her presence, and I did not respond. The woman smiled once more and disappeared. I was again alone. The experience had been so strong that I carefully memorized the strange name, Elieth, even though it meant nothing to me. I waited a while longer without anything more happening. I pressed the button on my watch. It was six thirty-five in the morning, after what I thought was probably the time of sunrise. Yet I remained sitting in my place a while longer to avoid leaving the cave prematurely. I did not want to take the chance of violating the quest rules and thereby losing the animal power that was transmitted to me earlier. While waiting, I noticed that now the darkness was comfortable and unimportant, almost like an illusion. I found my flashlight and turned it on for the first time since arriving at this spot in the cavern, rolled up the sleeping bag, and walked upward toward the cave’s mouth. My back pain of the previous day was gone. After a quarter hour of ascending toward the cavern’s opening, I saw daylight and the greenery of trees beyond. I climbed up and out of the cave’s mouth into warm and blinding sunlight. It was good to be home where the sun gives life to all things. Descending the slope below the cave, I reached out to touch the beautiful leaves of the plants and bushes. It seemed a great gift to be able to return to the planet’s surface with its green life and sunshine. I thanked the spirits for their help and for allowing me to return to this world. I knew that I was transformed, for the power of the XXX had literally become one with me. Postscript. Although my cave power quest had been successful, I remained puzzled by the significance of the woman with the name Elieth who had appeared and tried to entice me. Through my reading in the ensuing years, I concluded that she was possibly the ancient Hebrew goddess Lilith, although the name was slightly different. I was interested to discover that according to various old post-Biblical Jewish sources, Lilith’s home is a cave; she is mistress of all the animals and a killer of infants, and she was known for seducing men sleeping alone. According to some power-quest traditions, it is expected that an animal power encounter will shortly be followed by a dream. That indeed happened to me in the cave, except that I can assure you it was no sleeping dream. In that dream or event, the seeker’s helping power will usually be an ancestor appearing in human form. However, it is said that on rare occasions this second appearance can be not of a helping being, but of a harmful one attempting to interfere with the seeker’s quest.16 My opinion has long been that Elieth might have been such an interfering power, taking advantage of my openness in the cave. So, many decades ago, I told her to go away and have never asked her for help. To reinforce my disconnection from her, I now reveal her identity in this book. It is generally understood in shamanism that such a public declaration, if coupled with the intent to disconnect, usually sends away a personal power spirit. Meanwhile, I have long honored and maintained my confidential relationship with XXX. However, I am old, and we shall see how much longer XXX remains. One last observation: this may have been the first recorded successful cave power quest by a Westerner since those of ancient Europeans many thousands of years ago. But they did publish first—on their rock walls! (See Plate 1.) 2 We Exist! The Spirits Call for Recognition Readers may naturally wonder if what happened to me in the cave was a product of my imagination. That is understandable, for there were no witnesses who could validate my experiences. Fortunately, however, sometimes the spirits demonstrate their existence and power to two or more people at a time, and even to large groups of people. When this happens, these public demonstrations are often called miracles. For the shaman who is intimately interacting with helping spirits, miracles are almost routine events in healing work. In fact, spirit.produced miracles of healing are probably shamans’ most celebrated feature in indigenous societies. Separate from helping shamans carry out healing activities, spirits often attempt to communicate their reality through miracles and “micro-miracles.” These “wake-up calls” that the spirits send, often with the help of a shaman or shamanic practitioner, are perhaps best understood as attempts to educate people about their existence. I will now share a few in which I was personally involved. MIRACLE 1: THE NEW PAIR OF DIMES In August 1993 I was invited to give two presentations at the annual meeting of the Transpersonal Psychology Association in the Asilomar conference center in Pacific Grove, California. The theme of the conference was “New Paradigms in Psychology.” For one presentation, I was asked to introduce an audience of hundreds of people to shamanism as an example of one of these new paradigms. My plan was not only to talk about shamanism, but also to give everyone the opportunity to take a shamanic journey to the Upper World so that they could get a real taste of the power of shamanic work. Frankly I was not sure that these hundreds of persons, sitting in rows of chairs, would succeed, but I thought it was worth a try. I silently asked my spirits to help me in impressing the audience about the reality of spirits. They replied that I should have the lecture hall’s lights turned off and then to take two large quartz crystals out of my bag. I knew from my experience in shamanism that when used correctly, quartz crystals have the effect of amplifying whatever spirit power is being put into them. After the lecture hall was completely dark, I called silently for the help of the spirits and activated the crystals in an ancient way. In the darkness they briefly glowed with a faint light. At that moment, there was a scream in the audience. I asked that the lights be turned on. Then I saw a woman standing in the audience, waving her outstretched right hand. I asked her to come to one of the standing microphones in the aisles of the auditorium and to share her experience. I expected her to share a few words about her subjective experience and then to sit down, to be replaced by some other volunteer doing the same. But I was in for a surprise.At the microphone, she continued to hold her hand up high and announced that she had screamed because two dimes had suddenly materialized in her hand. I was stunned and delighted at the same time, for I had never expected anything of this magnitude. I invited the woman, whom I had never met, to come up on the stage. She displayed the coins to me and everyone, to great applause. I told the audience that the two tencent pieces were so shiny they looked freshly minted. I thanked her and, I must confess, felt rather self-satisfied about the public materialization. I thought the matter was done. However, as she left the stage to return to her seat, a man’s voice called out from the audience something I had completely overlooked. He shouted, “New pair o’ dimes!” He had perceived that it was not just a materialization but a message, a message reiterating the theme of the conference, “new paradigms.”1 There were more than four hundred witnesses to this event. A few years ago, the same woman approached me at a conference and reminded me who she was. She said she had kept the two dimes ever since, and pulled them out of her purse to show me again. They still looked new and shiny. MIRACLE 2: RECEIVING AN “IMPOSSIBLE” HEALING AND SPEAKING IN HAWAIIAN In successful shamanic healing work, miracles are almost routine events when the spirits wish to intercede. They particularly like to help a shaman who is their lineal descendant and are of even greater service if the patient is also helping that shaman in some way. An additional plus, but not necessary, is for the patient to be a lineal descendant, too. In the early 1990s I was diagnosed by three different eye specialists as having macular degeneration. They all agreed that the condition was irreversible. By the late 1990s the doctors found it was getting worse and concluded that nothing could be done. Since my wife Sandra and I were planning a vacation on the Big Island of Hawaii, one of my students suggested that we visit an elderly Hawaiian shaman-priest on the Kona coast, a spiritual kahuna with whom she was acquainted, to ask him for help. It seemed like the right thing to do. I was also curious to meet the man, Lanakila Brandt, who, although half-German in descent, had converted completely to the Hawaiian religion and reputedly was one of the last five authentic spiritual kahunas left on the Islands. We found him in the small community of Captain Cook, so named because it was a few miles from Kealakakua Bay, where the famous eighteenth-century British explorer and navigator made his initial landing in Hawaii and was later killed. Lanakila generously agreed to treat my eye condition if I followed a daily schedule that he outlined. For five mornings and evenings, as I lay silently on my back, he prayed over me in front of an altar of leaf-and flower-bedecked wooden images of traditional Hawaiian gods. I experienced nothing eventful until the fifth and last evening, when I felt the spirit of a deceased person entering my consciousness and showing me a scene in color. We (the spirit and I merged together) were looking southward down at a bay. I guessed that it was the nearby Kealakakua Bay and that we were partway up the cliff overlooking it. Before me on the water were two square-riggers at anchor. I did not know at that time that Captain Cook had come in two ships, but I thought, Captain Cook! and wondered if the spirit was that of a British seaman or even Cook himself. Then I wondered if the spirit was Hawaiian. Still, I was not sure. Next something very strange happened: the spirit began speaking clearly to me in a language I did not understand. I did not even know if it was Hawaiian, since the only words I had learned in that language, like any visitor to the Islands, were “aloha” and “mahalo” (thank you). But the spirit, who clearly seemed male, kept repeating himself over and over, apparently insistent that I remember his words. I gradually memorized the message with some difficulty, as I had to focus on ignoring the background prayers being chanted by Lanakila. I kept repeating the words silently to myself as I lay on my back with closed eyes, hoping that when the ritual was over Lanakila could tell me whether or not they resembled Hawaiian. As soon as Lanakila’s healing work was done, I wrote the words down, explained to him what had happened, and read them aloud. The words were: Hele hele aku i ka pono. “This a very good sign,” he smiled broadly. “You have just spoken Hawaiian. What you said literally is this: Go! Go! Forward to everything positive. The meaning of this message is: ‘Go ahead with full force (with your life); everything is positive, for you are on the straight path.’ ” Recently I sent the words the spirit gave me, together with Lanakila’s translation of them, to a professor of Hawaiian language at the University of Hawaii (Hilo) to check the accuracy of the sentence I received and its translation. He replied, “… the Hawaiian is quite correct and even includes the directional particle, aku.” The only suggestion he made was to add “a comma after the first hele.” Of course, the spirit never told me about a comma!2 I asked Lanakila, “What is the straight path?” for the phrase was new to me. “It is the moral path, the correct path,” Lanakila said, adding, “You have been blessed with support for your life, and the outcome for your eyes should be good. Keep in mind that the cure may take a few months.” Indeed, several months later when I asked my eye doctors to recheck my ocular condition, they could find no evidence of any macular degeneration whatsoever. Such a reversal, they said, was impossible, and the only explanation was that my previous diagnoses were wrong (although the diagnoses had been made repeatedly for almost a decade!).3 About three years later I came across a new book on Fiji (another Pacific Island culture) by Richard Katz, titled The Straight Path of the Spirit. The title jumped out at me, for I had not found any mention of “the straight path” since that meeting with Lanakila. In Katz’s book I discovered that what the spirit had told me was consistent with what other Pacific Islanders knew, and furthermore, the concept was central to their spiritual culture. MIRACLE 3: SPEAKING IN FINNISH When shamans merge with or “embody” a helping spirit, it is only natural that they talk in that spirit’s language. What is remarkable, as in my case as a patient in Hawaii, is that the words can be translated if someone is present who knows the language. Here is another personal example. In one of my courses, helping spirits are invited to merge with participants in order to provide them with healing power. To the beat of drums, each participant patiently waits until a healing spirit unites with him or her and causes the participant to start singing and dancing to bring healing power to others. They do this one by one. On this particular occasion, a helping spirit merged with me. As usual, when I experienced its healing power, I (“we”) started singing and dancing spontaneously within the circle of the group. As I did so, words came out of my mouth that I could not understand, repeating themselves with great forcefulness until my dance ended and I finally sat down. At the end of the session, there was some sharing by participants. One of them, a Finnish woman, raised her hand and asked me if I knew what I had been singing. I did not have any idea. She then said that I had been singing in Finnish and repeating the phrase, “No more university!” This caused a great deal of astonishment and laughter in the group, since the students knew that I had recently rejected university life as a professor. And, of course, I knew no Finnish.4 MIRACLE 4: SPEAKING IN ARCHAIC NORWEGIAN As in the example above, what seems impossible or miraculous to the nonshaman is really quite simple and even routine when one knows that (1) spirits really exist, and (2) if the spirits wish to, they can speak through shamans. While instructing an advanced initiations course in 2008, I asked for a volunteer for a demonstration of these realities. Amanda Foulger, one of our faculty members, kindly agreed. I asked her if she knew the nationalities of her ancestors. She said that they were primarily English, secondly Scottish, and distantly Norwegian. Of these nationalities the only language she knew was English, being a Californian. Then I asked her to enter the shamanic state of consciousness, or SSC, with the aid of repetitious drumming, to merge with an ancestor from the 1500s or earlier, and to have the unknown ancestor speak through her. All this was in the presence of some forty people. After a couple minutes of drumming, Amanda stood up, and the drumming stopped. She began to speak loudly, slowly waving her arms back and forth. After she finished and sat down, the students looked at each other, puzzled, for her words seemed completely unintelligible. However, one person in the group, a student familiar with Scandinavian languages, raised her hand. She said that Amanda had spoken in an archaic form of Norwegian. Furthermore, she said, the spirit speaking though Amanda was apparently on a hunt and had been discussing with a companion in which direction they should go. This astonished all the students, including Amanda herself, for she did not know any Norwegian whatsoever.5 MIRACLE 5: A CURE THE PHYSICIAN SAID HE COULD NEVER PROVIDE This next report was written by Ken Emerson, who acted as a demonstration client in a group practice known as “the spirit boat.” Sometimes called the “spirit canoe” or “spirit raft,” this practice has long existed in one form or another among peoples on the Northwest Coast of North America, in the Northwest Amazon, in Australia, and in Indonesia. Here is what he says: Early in 2004 I was diagnosed with alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency (A1AT). A1AT is synthesized in the liver, and when deficient, results in emphysema. Eventually damage occurs to the liver, resulting in cirrhosis. Replacement therapy is available through weekly IV infusions of the A1AT protein. I had been receiving these infusions since 2004; however, my lung function continued to decrease. In April 2011 I attended the Foundation’s two-week intensive workshop with Alicia Gates and Amanda Foulger. I was chosen as a client for the spirit boat exercise. At the conclusion of the session I immediately knew I had received a healing. My lungs were clear, breathing was no longer labored, and my heart was beating regular and strong.After arriving home I consulted my pulmonologist for a scheduled appointment. He conducted all the regular tests, including chest X-ray, spirometry, and blood workup. He was amazed at the results, believing that the equipment had failed! He ran the tests again only to find the same results as before. The chest X-ray showed virtually no signs of emphysema, although some tissue damage was still apparent. The spirometry reading revealed lung function at 82 percent of normal; the previous reading was 77 percent. The A1AT protein level had increased from 74 to 77 (normal is 90–200). My doctor could not medically explain the reasons for these drastic changes. As I was smiling like a child on Christmas morning, he asked me what was going on. Without revealing the details, I related the results of my healing from the loving compassionate spirits. He just shook his head and said I had received something that he could never provide. He discontinued the IV infusion therapy, and we scheduled a follow-up appointment for six months later. At the next appointment the same tests were conducted. This time the results were: no signs of emphysema, lung function at 112 percent of normal, and A1AT protein level at 80. We will continue to monitor my condition every six months. This time when I left the office, we were both smiling!6 In the examples given in this chapter, the spirits were not only educating us about their existence, but they were also showing their ability to heal and help. I remember a popular book that was first published some years ago called A Course in Miracles. I resisted the temptation to call this chapter (from the shaman’s perspective) “Of Course They’re Miracles!” 3 The Search Shamans are delusional and quite possibly schizophrenic, I learned in the early 1950s as an anthropology student at the University of California in Berkeley. The evidence offered was that shamans claimed that they could see and talk with spirits, and even use them to heal people. However, since shamans sometimes actually did seem to effect cures, they deserved more study if it was done from a psychological perspective. Walter Cline was a quiet dissenter regarding this purely psychological view of shamans. Such a perception of shamans was a heritage of Western prejudices stretching back centuries to the Inquisition’s ridicule and persecution of shamans, then in Europe called “witches,” which they are still called in northern Finland. The Inquisition’s methods of torture and execution were gradually replaced by the more subtle pressures of secularism that accompanied the rise of science during the Age of “Enlightenment” in the eighteenth century. In that century one of the last vestiges of European shamanism, visualization methods, still survived to some degree in folk medicine, known as “journeys of the soul.” However, eighteenth-century academicians declared that there was no scientific proof of the existence of the soul. Therefore, the emerging medical establishment decreed that visualization for healing had to be abandoned on those grounds. The “heresy” of visualized travel did not return to European medicine until Freud in the late nineteenth century asked a patient to “imagine” himself in a train going through the countryside and to describe what he saw. The academic reluctance to take seriously souls, spirits, and shamans continues to the present time.1 Not having actually tried shamanic methods themselves, even sympathetic anthropologists have tended to view shamanism not in terms of first-hand knowledge but within the framework of Western preconceptions or paradigms. Although perhaps no longer ethnocentric, most of these scholars still tended to see shamans through the lens of cognicentrism, which is a tendency to judge the validity of other people’s experiences in altered states of consciousness without having experienced those states oneself.2 Without adequate participant observation, such scholars were liable to inconclusively put shamans and shamanism into currently fashionable theoretical pigeonholes. While “participant observation” was given lip service in anthropology as a desired field method to arrive at an accurate understanding of native behavior and practices, no anthropologist was known to have attempted it in the case of shamanism prior to the latter half of the twentieth century. At the same time, the shamans’ feats of healing and unbelievable journeys to other worlds both fascinated and perplexed Western scholars. The armchair French theorist Lucien Lévy-Bruhl proposed in his early twentieth-century book Les fonctions mentales dans les sociétés inférieures that “native” accounts of their incredible experiences were indeed genuine, but that such peoples were prisoners of a prerational “primitive” mind.3 That this opinion has not entirely disappeared is evidenced by the more recent book of another influential armchair writer, Julian Jaynes, who theorized at length about the consciousness of preagricultural peoples without investigating the consciousness of “preagricultural” peoples, hunters and gatherers, who still existed on the planet.4 Lévy-Bruhl’s opinion about tribal peoples and shamans was perhaps relatively charitable compared to those that were subsequently expressed for decades in the twentieth century by much of the psychoanalytic community, where shamans’ experiences tended to be viewed as “hallucinations” and the shamans themselves as actively psychotic or psychotics “in partial remission.”5 Indeed, Weston La Barre, an anthropologist heavily influenced by Freudian psychoanalytic theory, argued that virtually all mystical experiences, including those of shamanism, were manifestations of neurosis or psychosis.6 Carl Jung stands apart from such a view and from Freud in making what he himself terms “journeys” to a lower world,7 and being educated there about the reality of spirits by Elijah, who tells him, “We are real, not symbols,” and again, “You may call us symbols.… But we are just as real as your fellow men. You invalidate nothing and solve nothing by calling us symbols.… We are certainly what you call real.”8 However, it is notable that Jung wrote these words only secretly in his Red Book, which was not made public until 2009, almost half a century after his death. Undoubtedly the foremost twentieth-century figure in the scholarly rehabilitation of shamanism, and in the recognition of its virtually pan-human occurrence, was Mircea Eliade, who published the first version of his classic book Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy in French in 1951. Eliade proposed that although local practices had their own variations, a key consistent feature was the shaman’s journey to other worlds in a trance (“ecstasy”). In his book, which remains the outstanding general reference work on shamanism, Eliade suggested that shamanism was the progenitor of all other spiritual systems and religions, although he made it clear that shamanism itself was a methodology, not a religion. However, even Eliade was not immune from the mental-illness view of shamans. As late as 1951, just five years before my first Amazonian fieldwork, he took the position that “the majority of shamans are (or have been) psychopaths.”9 Thus, from the scholars’ “psychological” perspective, shamans were not “liars and charlatans” but merely insane! The shamans had the good fortune, however, to be born into “crazy” cultures, where they could be accepted. They could even employ their craziness by catering to the mass delusions of the people among whom they lived by being shamans. Such “crazy” cultures, of course, are the “primitive” tribal ones, in contrast to our own “civilized” Western culture whose manifestations of presumed sanity include two world wars, the Holocaust, and other wholesale acts of genocide, urban violence, and the accelerating destruction of the planetary life-support system. Another thing I learned as an anthropology graduate student, but not from Walter Cline, was that fieldworkers were to keep a skeptical “objectivity.” Out of paternalistic good manners or, perhaps more practically, to avoid alienating their native informants, the anthropologists’ skepticism was not expressed directly to the indigenous peoples, but only upon returning home to the academic community, where Western psychological and sociological assumptions were used to explain what “really” was going on in the native cultures. This somewhat hypocritical approach was considered entirely proper. Implicit in all this was the patronizing assumption of the superiority of modern Western knowledge and that the natives’ function was to be subjects for study, rather than to be possible teachers of us in the West. I was similarly taught the dangers of “going native” in the field, something that “unstable personalities” might be tempted to do. Examples that I was given of ethnologists or cultural anthropologists who had “gone over the edge” included Frank Cushing of the Bureau of American Ethnology of the Smithsonian Institution. About a century ago, Cushing stopped publishing on Zuni religion after becoming formally initiated into their secret societies, thereby depriving the Western world of his discoveries. He also achieved the rank of First War Chief and generally became a scandal for many in the profession by failing to “keep his distance” and thereby not fulfilling his academic obligations.10 FROM THE IVORY TOWER TO THE AMAZON RAINFOREST It was with this academic background that I engaged in my first fieldwork in the Upper Amazon in 1956–57. My intention was to go beyond the frontier of Western colonization to experience life in a still.unconquered Native American tribal society. I was almost a century too late for this opportunity in North America, so I chose South America, and specifically the Jívaro proper or Untsuri Shuar of eastern Ecuador, who were famous for their ability to resist would-be conquerors over the centuries. My anthropological responsibility and intention was to do an accurate ethnography or description of their total culture, for their sensationalistic practice of “head-shrinking” had resulted in many lurid, inaccurate, and prejudicial accounts of their life and ideas.11 In 1956, shortly after I arrived among the Shuar, I noticed a man who wandered in the forest day and night, seeing and talking with spirits. Having just come from the lofty towers of academia, I thought, Aha, I have one! So I asked the people if he was a shaman. They replied, no, he was crazy!Although they viewed him as crazy, they did not consider him to be having hallucinations. After all, almost everyone in that society had taken the native hallucinogens and knew the spirits were real because they had seen them, too. The reason they considered him crazy was that he could not turn off his contact with the spirits. He was useless to his people. Their shamans, in contrast, consciously chose when they would interact with the spirits and did so with defined purpose to help others. This was the beginning of my real education about shamanism. Soon I learned that I was in a society not only of warriors, but of shamans. The shamans numbered in the hundreds, and their healing and other activities permeated daily life everywhere. I found them fascinating. They introduced me to concepts of reality far more exciting than anything I had ever encountered before. Much of this seemed connected to their use of consciousness-changing plants and plant mixtures. Both the shamans and the nonshamans employed a variety of hallucinogens, or psychedelics, to see and interact with otherwise invisible spirits in an invisible alternate reality. Perhaps no indigenous people in the world used a wider assortment of psychedelics. There was a very mild one for babies to help them gain contact with the beneficial spirits of the hidden reality; there were ones for children, both boys and girls; there was one for hunting dogs so that they, too, could gain the help of the spirits; there was one especially for shamans, and another for the vision quest. If a young boy misbehaved, his parents might force him to take a psychedelic to straighten him out; the idea was that he would respect the authority of his parents more if he discovered that they really knew what they were talking about when they spoke of the spirits and the hidden reality.12 My dissertation project, for which I had received a grant, had nothing to do with shamanism or psychedelics, so I had to focus my investigations on other topics. Twice during that first fieldwork among the Jívaro in 1956–57, shamans offered me the opportunity to take their mind-altering potions and plants. I was tempted but held back, concerned about even slight brain damage. A clear-thinking mind was the most important resource I had for writing a successful doctoral dissertation. Yet, as my months passed, something happened subtly to my spiritual orientation. I was consciously adopting some of the Shuar assumptions about reality, including the reality of spirits. With the river crossing incident, I really started to wake up to the importance of acquiring spirit power.13 Now I found myself silently invoking the protection of guardian spirits on the occasions when the Indians’ continuous feuds, raids, ambushes, and killings placed me in physical danger. The spirits’ presence felt tangible and reassuring, although still invisible to me. Naturally I did not communicate this slight shift in my Weltanschauung in letters I wrote to my doctoral dissertation committee back at the university. Indeed, during this first field year, I basically kept my “proper” distance as an ethnographer, remaining much more an observer than a participant. When I returned to the United States a year later, the personal spiritual perceptions that I had experienced in eastern Ecuador gradually receded from my consciousness and seemed more like faint memories. Then, four years later, on another expedition to the Upper Amazon for the American Museum of Natural History, I actually crossed the threshold fully. On a fateful night in 1961 among the Conibo Indians of Eastern Peru, I drank the shamans’ psychedelic plant brew, ayahuasca.14 The Conibo required it of me before they would describe their own spiritual experiences and religion. I cooperated, determined not to repeat my failure to drink this potion among the Shuar. My visionary experiences that ensued among the Conibo were not only extremely powerful but coincided incredibly closely with those that the Conibo later revealed to me. I began to realize that the cultural theories I had been taught as an anthropology student were inadequate to explain this consistency of experience, apparently regardless of culture. This discovery radically challenged my Western views of reality and started me on a truly serious search for knowledge. While I was still with the Conibo, this search took the form of training in their methods of shamanism, using ayahuasca and shamanic song as nightly catalysts to journey into sacred realms and to work with the spirits. There was an excitement and fulfillment in my life that had never existed before, for I was discovering and exploring a whole additional reality, the reality of a hidden universe. Eventually I had to leave my Conibo friends to return to the United States in 1961 to take a position at Berkeley. I was also leaving two North American missionaries who had told their mission board they would no longer teach the Bible to the Indians and wished to serve only as medical missionaries, for they recognized that the shamans’ daily revelations were spiritually more authoritative than the old stories in the Bible. They were Dick and Dorothy Kendig, for whom I used the pseudonyms “Bob and Millie” in The Way of the Shaman.15 On my way out of the jungle, I stopped by their mission station to say good-bye. Dick told me that he had just been to the river town of Pucallpa, where he ran into a bearded “beatnik” from New York who had just taken ayahuasca, too. It was Allen Ginsberg. I was sorry to have missed him, since he was the only other “gringo” I had ever heard of who had drunk the brew.16 I wondered how his experiences compared with mine. I sought him out when I returned to San Francisco but learned that he had left for India. It would be some time before we could compare experiences.In the San Francisco Bay Area I found myself unexpectedly becoming involved in a small but rapidly growing network of adventurous psychologists, poets, musicians, botanists, chemists, and bohemians whose psychedelic experiences with LSD, Mexican mushrooms, peyote, and mescaline were engendering great excitement and discussion. There were now people in Western culture who were beginning to understand something of what the shamans already knew. They were the avant garde of what would be later known as the Psychedelic Sixties. Allen Ginsberg finally returned from India, astonishing me with his long hair, the beginning of long hair in the American counterculture. On my visits to him and others at the place he stayed on Gough Street in San Francisco, I began to feel that I had found a second home outside academia. Most of these early-sixties fellow explorers of consciousness and hidden realities were well-educated, intelligent, creative, and articulate individuals concentrated in the San Francisco region, as nurturing an environment for them as it had been for the immediately preceding Beat Generation. It was exciting to spend time with them and to see the rapid evolution of the New Age movement. In early 1963 I gave a public lecture in Berkeley under the auspices of the University of California on “Drugs and Reality in the Upper Amazon.” At that time, psychedelics or hallucinogens were not yet a “dangerous” academic subject. In the talk I explained that the Shuar (then called the Jívaro) believed that the only real reality was that seen with the aid of the ingested hallucinogen ayahuasca, and that ordinary daily life was by comparison a “lie.” Unbeknownst to me, the talk’s content was summarized in a newsletter sent to all campuses of the university.As a result, in November 1963, at the annual meeting of the American Anthropological Association in San Francisco, I was approached by a stocky, well-dressed, Latino-looking gentleman who introduced himself as Carlos Castaneda and said that he was a student at UCLA. He wanted to talk with me about what I had said in that lecture in Berkeley. He explained that he was having difficulty organizing his field notes from working with a Yaqui Indian and expressed interest in the dichotomy of realities on which I had lectured. We retired to a quiet corner to converse. I found that Carlos was the first anthropologist I had met who was enthusiastic about the realms that I had been penetrating, and who seemed to share my serious respect of the indigenous knowledge connected to them. During the ensuing weeks he often drove to Berkeley from Los Angeles to share thoughts and experiences. Our discussions helped develop the usefulness of a concept of two realities for Westerners. In his future publications, Carlos formalized the dichotomy into two simple terms, “ordinary” and “nonordinary” reality, which I have associated respectively with the “ordinary state of consciousness” and the “shamanic state of consciousness.”17 Encouraged by at last knowing an anthropologist with whom I could share experiences involving shamanism and hallucinogens, I was stimulated subsequently to revisit the Shuar three more times.18 Carlos had a great sense of humor and a dramatic earnestness. He told wonderful stories about his encounters with peyote and a Yaqui man, a brujo named don Juan. Sandra Harner and I encouraged him to start writing them down. Within just a few weeks, he brought us the first written account. It was such an impressive and presumably accurate ethnographic narration that we encouraged him to bring more. As his visits continued, and the possible chapters accumulated, it was clear that Carlos had now produced a book-length manuscript. We helped him get it to Grove Press in New York, which immediately turned it down, something its owner reportedly later deeply regretted. It was, of course, finally published in 1968 by the University of California Press under the title The Teachings of Don Juan after many difficulties and drama—but that is another story for another time. One thing was clear, however: popular Western indifference to indigenous spiritual and philosophical knowledge was about to change. Even before then, after the 1964 publication in English of Eliade’s 1951 book on shamanism, interest in the subject was rapidly developing in the United States, especially in California. This interest was stimulated significantly by the widespread use of psychedelics such as LSD in the 1960s. Prior to 1964, few of these American psychedelic explorers had any idea that they were rediscovering territory familiar to shamans for thousands of years. Not surprisingly, they sought frameworks for their experiences in the well-known spiritual traditions of Eastern civilizations, especially Hinduism and Tibetan Buddhism. They spoke of “trips” rather than “journeys,” and few of them had heard of shamans or their journeys. At the same time that Eliade’s book appeared, a strange thing was starting to happen to the psychedelic “hippie” explorers of San Francisco’s Haight-Ashbury district. Their trips with LSD and other mind-altering substances led many of them to conclude that they were reincarnations of deceased American Indians. Accordingly, quite a few began to wear beads, buckskins, and feathers. From a shamanic perspective, many had probably indeed experienced merging with spirits in their trips, especially spirits calling for recognition. Meanwhile back in Berkeley, I attempted to communicate my ayahuasca and other shamanic experiences to my fellow anthropologists. They tried to be sympathetic and act interested, but I came to realize that my experiences collided as much with their secular paradigms as they had with the missionaries’ religious views. Largely dropping my attempts to communicate the ineffable, I turned instead to the stacks of the great university library in Berkeley to find kindred spirits, both literally and figuratively. At first I focused on searching for overlooked evidence of tribal use of hallucinogens, for the powerful effects of ayahuasca, and later of datura. My experiences with those substances, and the use of other plants in native North, Central, and South America, made me think that human spiritual experiences must have originated from the use of psychotropic plants; in other words, that the plants were the fundamental source of religious experience and, thus, of religion and shamanism. Convinced that the use and impact of such plant substances had not been taken seriously by students of the origin of religion, I dug into the ethnological and historical cross-cultural literature with great curiosity and anticipation.I found considerable evidence that shamans in some parts of the world had indeed used psychedelic plants to achieve the experience of another reality. Such plants also seemed to lie behind the stories of flying “witches,” werewolves, vampires, and zombies. Some of these discoveries were embodied in my article on the use of psychedelic plants in the survival of shamanism (then “witchcraft”) in late medieval and Renaissance Europe.19 The article was part of my edited book, Hallucinogens and Shamanism, composed primarily of papers read at a symposium of the American Anthropological Association meeting in 1965. Carlos Castaneda was among those in the symposium. His paper, unlike the others, was never published. It was his decision. Others were simultaneously engaged in a similar scholarly search set off especially by Gordon Wasson’s experience with the “magic mushroom” among the Mazatec in Mexico,20 by Albert Hofmann’s publications following his discovery of LSD,21 by Aldous Huxley’s accounts of his experiences with mescaline,22 and by Timothy Leary’s introduction of LSD to the cloistered undergraduate students of Harvard.23 Thus, the assumption among many of us in the early and mid-1960s was that “the drugs did it,” and therefore various articles were published ascribing the origin of the “religious experience” to the ancient ingestion of psychedelic plants.24 The prevalent experimentation with LSD during those years reinforced the view that an ingested bioactive substance was the “secret” key to the shamans’ experience of entering another reality. In 1968 the first books by Castaneda added to that general opinion,25 as had the Wassons’ 1957 opus Mushrooms, Russia, and History, in which they ascribed the visionary experiences of Siberian shamans to their ingestion of the psychedelic fly agaric mushroom (Amanita muscaria).26 However, as a result of my cross-cultural research, by the late 1960s I was beginning to conclude reluctantly that shamans in most of the world’s indigenous cultures did their work without the appreciable use of psychedelic substances. It was becoming inescapably obvious to me that throughout the world, percussion sound, most notably by drumming, was far more widely used than psychedelics by indigenous shamans. Yet it was difficult to accept the possibility that the shamanic use of the drum could profoundly alter one’s state of consciousness. RECOGNIZING THE POWER OF THE DRUM Starting in 1948 at Zuni pueblo in New Mexico, I was awed by the effect of repetitive ceremonial drumming in a sacred context and, in fact, had a truly religious experience at Zuni. In the early 1950s I was exposed to the enchanting effects of Mohave and Cahuilla rattles, and of wooden foot drums in Northern California sacred “roundhouse” ceremonies.27 Then in the 1960s I found drumming being used in a specifically shamanic healing context among the Coast Salish people of Puget Sound in western Washington State, although no journeying was involved. Gradually, my cross-cultural reading in shamanism forced me to conclude that shamans in most of the world’s cultures did not ingest or use psychotropic plants in order to change consciousness. I bought a Pueblo-type double-headed drum in the 1960s and decided to experiment with it for journeying. Much to my pleasant surprise, I discovered that steady, repetitive drumming immediately altered my state of consciousness. I could make shamanic journeys without psychedelics! I should not have been surprised, however. Shamans, as usual, knew what they were doing, benefiting from millennia of experimentation.Early in my personal experiments, I found that a steady, monotonous beat of about 205 to 220 times a minute was the most effective for making journeys. At that time, however, I lacked information as to whether this was the same frequency of beat used by the drumming shamans of Siberia for their journey work. Then, a few years later, a four-minute tape recording of a Siberian shaman drumming was “bootlegged” to me from the Soviet Union, where shamanism was illegal. (See Plate 2.) I was excited to find that their drumbeats were in the same range as mine. Years later, during my first visit to the Soviet Union in 1984, Yuri Simchenko, a Russian ethnographer who had spent twenty-eight seasons of fieldwork in Siberia, told me that the real Siberian shamans normally employed only the drum to change their state of consciousness, rather than the psychoactive Amanita muscaria mushroom. The mushroom, Simchenko reported, was mainly used by nonshamans who have been unable to journey successfully with the drum alone. Also, he told me it is usually difficult to maintain the discipline necessary for shamanic work when the Amanita spirit takes over the body. The Chukchee of eastern Siberia are well known for sometimes ingesting the Amanita. However, the great Russian ethnologist Waldemar Bogoras in 1907 wrote in his classic work on the Chukchee: “The single means used by the Chukchee shamans, novice or experienced, for communication with ’spirits’ is the beating of the drum and singing.”28 When the Siberian shamans begin to beat the drum for the early portion of their journeys, it is in a steady, monotonous rhythm. This tends to be replaced with more irregular drumbeats as the shamans merge with specific spirits in their journeys and engage in adventures in nonordinary reality.29 Very soon I concluded that monotonous percussion sound, or “auditory (or ‘sonic’) driving,”30 done in conjunction with shamanic methods, could yield shamanic results in many ways comparable to those achieved with psychedelics. For example, the ayahuasca-based shamanic extraction healings with which I was familiar in the Amazon were accomplished equally well by Indian peoples on the West Coast of North America using only auditory driving, as in the form of wooden “clappers” and stamping staffs in Northern California,31 or in the form of drumming, as in the Puget Sound area, or through the repetitious use of hand bells, as among the Indian Shakers of Oregon and Washington.32 This conclusion was a major personal discovery, for it meant that shamanic spiritual experiences could no longer be dismissed as simply due to the effects of drugs. Indeed, the implications were enormous, as they suggested that drums and drugs were different doorways to the same spiritual realms. With regard to shamanic journeying to other worlds, I still had not found anyone in western North America using the drum or other auditory driving device for this purpose. Much later I learned that drumming was being used for shamanic ascension among some Canadian Athapaskan peoples.33 Worldwide, it appeared that the most common vehicle for the shaman’s journey was auditory driving in the form of simple, monotonous percussion sound. Although this was usually produced by the drum, in some places other percussion instruments were used, such as click sticks used by most Aboriginal peoples of Australia. In the wet tropics of Southeast Asia, shamans normally used gongs and metal bangles instead of drums. In some regions of the world, such as in parts of North America, Mexico, South America, and Siberia,34 the rattle was employed to provide the monotonous percussion sounds, often in conjunction with the ingestion of a mild psychedelic such as peyote, or with consciousness-changing Piptadenia snuff and certain varieties of tobacco.35 It was clear that auditory driving in shamanism took many forms in addition to the use of the drum. One such form was the use of the musical bow, and of its metal relative, the mouth-harp, both of which produce a repetitive, percussive twanging sound and are used by shamans. Those in Mongolia and Siberia today generally prefer the mouth-harp, while the Upper Amazonian Shuar still use the musical bow (see Plate 3a). The fiber string of the musical bow is plucked at the shaman’s open mouth, the mouth serving as the resonance chamber for the bow’s percussive sound. The musical bow is often almost inaudible to others nearby, but its repetitious percussion is strong enough inside the head to permit the Shuar shaman to change consciousness. A half-human figure, presumably a shaman merged with the Bison Spirit, is recognized by archaeologists as playing the musical bow among the wall paintings in the famous Upper Paleolithic cave of Les Trois Frères in France (see Plate 3b). If the painting represents what a shaman was doing inside the cave, the quiet musical bow would have been a good auditory-driving choice, compared to the drum, to avoid dislodging rocks from the cave’s ceiling. My personal discovery of the effectiveness of the drum for shamanic journeying was, of course, just a rediscovery of what shamans the world over had long known. For example, the drum is called the “shaman.horse” among the Soyot people in Tuva, on the southern edge of Siberia, because of its ability to help the shaman fly to the Upper and Lower Worlds,36 the beats of the drum resembling the beats of a horse’s hooves.37 The drum not only helps one travel shamanically but stimulates visionary experiences. Thus, the Sami (“Lapp”) people of northern Scandinavia call the drum literally “a thing out of which pictures come” (gavados).38 I began to call the altered state accompanying the drumming (and also psychedelics) the shamanic state of consciousness (SSC). It is not a naïve altered state of consciousness but a state that includes knowledge of shamanic purpose and discipline, such as that involved in helping and healing others. The SSC has differing intensities, from light to deep, and can have different effects, particularly if a properly prepared powerful hallucinogen like ayahuasca (yagé) is used.39 From a shamanic point of view, the spirits of such plants not only have power, but they also have their own personalities and messages, which impinge significantly on the nature of the experience. Auditory driving in many ways does not carry such influences. In the 1970s, searching the scientific literature for an explanation of the mental effects of drumming, I was able to locate only three significant publications in English on the subject. This was both surprising and disappointing, since even in the Western world, as we all know, drums continue to be used to alter one’s state of consciousness for entertainment and recreation, mourning processions, and military marches. Perhaps drumming has been such a natural part of our lives that we have lacked the psychological distance to wonder why. Two of the three publications I found were by Andrew Neher, who in the early 1960s pioneered the scientific study of the effects of drumming on brain wave patterns. As a result of his laboratory research, he concluded that drumming produces unusual changes in the central nervous system. He called this “auditory driving,”40 which I sometimes alternatively name “sonic driving.” Two factors he noted seemed particularly important: (1) a drum beat contains many frequencies and thus electrically stimulates a variety of sensory and motor regions of the brain simultaneously; and (2) a drum beat mainly contains low frequencies and thus can be loud and provide great energy input without causing the pain and damage that would result from high-frequency sounds of a similar amplitude. Neher also proposed a connection to ceremonial and religious experience.41 The third publication was by a psychiatrist, Wolfgang Jilek, who had studied the therapeutic effects of the shamanistic Spirit Dances of the Salish Indian people of British Columbia and Washington. He and a colleague found that the Salish deerskin drums were predominantly beaten four to seven times per second during shamanistic initiation procedures. He noted that this was in the theta-wave EEG frequency range, a range that “is expected to be most effective in the production of trance states.”42 This was faster than the tempo range I had found effective for journeying, but both practices shared a loud, monotonous beat. Despite the work of Neher and Jilek, the effect of the drum in altering one’s state of consciousness remains a subject of controversy among academics, and lately it has been fashionable to criticize Neher’s findings, as did Gilbert Rouget, whose position in turn has been usefully criticized by Gabe Turow.43 New scientific research by psychologists Melinda Maxfield and Sandra Harner supports the view that significant psychological and physiological effects are produced by shamanic drumming.44 In any case, persons interested in practicing shamanism need not await the outcome of academic debates and scientific research. They need only listen to shamanic drumming for their journeys to discover for themselves its importance. The effectiveness of auditory, or sonic, driving for accessing another reality was only one of the innumerable discoveries made by shamans and other indigenous people. Later we will return to the use of the drum in shamanic journeying. SONIC-OPTIC DRIVING If the shaman is moving about, another type of tool is sometimes used in shamanic journeying. It is what I call the Siberian eye curtain. Hanging down over the eyes from a crown or headdress of shamans in Siberia and adjacent areas, a row of fringes helps shamans to see both realities simultaneously. When working, the shamans wearing these eye curtains typically swing their heads left and right, causing the perceptions of ordinary reality to be constantly interrupted by darkness. These interruptions of sight reinforce the regular auditory interruptions of silence produced by the drum, as I found. Just as shamanic drumming produces a result in consciousness that I am calling auditory driving, especially for journeying, the swinging eye.curtain fringes seem to constitute a kind of coexisting optic driving. The two together result in what might be called “auditory-optic” or, for syllabic economy, “sonic-optic” driving. The drumbeats and the swings of eye-curtain fringes “break up” ordinary reality, helping shamans pass through them to other worlds. (See Plate 4.) For this to work, however, the external light should be dim, so that light does not interfere with the visual imagery coming to the shaman. CORE SHAMANISM Over decades of my own practical experimentation, cross-cultural research, and fieldwork, I gradually winnowed out underlying universal, near-universal, and common principles and practices of shamanism, including the use of auditory driving to alter the state of consciousness. Especially in the 1970s I actively developed methods for practicing and teaching these principles, continually refining and going farther with them. Partially this work was pursued within the development of my private practice of shamanic healing and divination, and partially it was done in response to requests from other persons for training in the methods of the shaman. These underlying transcultural principles of shamanic practice provide the basis for what I named core shamanism. As I indicated in the introduction, core shamanism consists of the universal, near-universal, and common features of shamanism, together with journeys to other worlds, a distinguishing feature of shamanism. For most Westerners, learning and practicing core shamanism, including shamanic journeying, is a far more productive approach than imitating a shaman’s practices in a single culture, for each culture has its own symbolism, mythology, and conceptual elaborations. If that is not your own culture, then those elaborations, specializations, and meanings will not be appropriate for you in the way they are appropriate for that particular indigenous people. In connection with this, anthropologist Joan Townsend carefully distinguished core shamanism from neo-shamanism.45 For more information, see “Principal Concepts of Core Shamanism” in Appendix D. The hunger so many Westerners seem to have for this long-lost spiritual way is remarkable. In response to requests, I began teaching Westerners core shamanism for practical use, giving training workshops in the mid-and late 1970s in North America and Europe. I especially emphasized shamanic journeying with drumming, which I found to be of central importance in initiating Westerners into contact with the spirits, the essential ingredient in shamanism and shamanic healing. Gradually the training workshops increased in frequency, complexity, and length. To meet the demand, during the last three decades or so I have been assisted in the teaching of the workshops by former students who were invited to be members of the faculty of the Foundation for Shamanic Studies, a nonprofit organization founded to save, study, and teach shamanism and shamanic healing worldwide. Today presented by the international faculty of the Foundation for Shamanic Studies, the teachings cover many shamanic practices besides journeying, including power animal retrieval, extraction healing, soul retrieval, divination, psychopomp work, depossession, and very advanced shamanic initiations that include a great many other practices. They are all taught within the framework of core shamanism. 4 Our World: Shamans and Spirits Close your eyes, then you will find the way. —from a Puyallup Indian myth1 Based on archaeological and comparative ethnological evidence, shamanism is believed by many scholars to be at least 30,000 years old and quite possibly is more ancient. Without dispute, it is the most time.tested system for healing through the purposeful integration of mental, emotional, and spiritual capacities. Although the word “shaman” comes from the Tungusic-speaking peoples of Siberia and north China, the worldwide similarity of the basic practices led anthropologists to apply the term generically elsewhere. Until the present century, shamanism was practiced on all inhabited continents by indigenous peoples, including such widely separated peoples as the Sami (formerly “Lapps”) of northernmost Europe, the aboriginal peoples of Australia, the Kung Bushmen of southern Africa, and the indigenous peoples of North and South America. However, due to such factors as introduced disease, wars, missionization, and persecution, the numbers of indigenous shamans were drastically reduced in the last five centuries, commonly along with a radical erosion of their culture’s shamanic knowledge. In the last few decades this situation has started to change. SHAMANS Definitions are often a contentious matter, particularly in the case of shamans and shamanism. What I offer now is what I have personally found useful in my work with shamans, and within shamanism, for half a century. The following words are not intended to satisfy everyone, or perhaps even most, but they are intended to communicate what I am talking about in this book. While the work of shamans encompasses virtually the full gamut of known spiritual practices, shamanism is universally characterized by an intentional change in consciousness (Eliade’s “ecstasy”) to engage in purposeful two-way interaction with spirits. Its most distinctive feature, which is not universal, is the out-of-body journey to other worlds.2 It should be noted that in some indigenous societies, there are shamans who do not journey at all, and others who journey only in the Middle World or, if they journey beyond the Middle World, may not go to both the Upper and Lower Worlds. What they all do share is disciplined interaction with spirits in nonordinary reality to help and heal others. Whether journeying or not, shamans depend heavily upon the assistance of their tutelary entities, or helping spirits, with whom they interact in the altered state of consciousness that worldwide is most commonly achieved with the aid of auditory (sonic) driving. Both in traditional indigenous settings and in contemporary society, shamans work within a holistic framework. They address the spiritual side of illness in a complementary relationship with the nonspiritual treatment of illness and injury.Shamans must be distinguished from sorcerers. Sorcerers are not healers and commonly cause pain and suffering. THE TWO REALITIES A basic assumption in shamanism is that there are two realities, and the perception of each depends upon one’s state of consciousness. This assumption is explicit in core shamanism but usually is implicit in indigenous shamanism, where there is commonly not as much interest in a disciplined distinction between realities. Indeed, some indigenous shamans I have known seemed to enjoy the drama and romance of a blurring between realities. Shamans access another reality especially in order to work with helping spirits to heal, divine, and accomplish other tasks for their patients and clients. This other reality is accessed by entering the shamanic state of consciousness (SSC), as I described in The Way of the Shaman.3 The SSC can range from light to deep and is most commonly entered temporarily with the help of auditory driving. Those in the ordinary state of consciousness (OSC) perceive ordinary reality (OR); those in the SSC are able to enter into and perceive nonordinary reality (NOR). These states are both called realities because each is empirically encountered and has its own forms of knowledge and relevance to human existence. NOR is not a consensual reality, and indeed if it were, shamanic practitioners would have no function, for it is their responsibility to perceive successfully what others do not. One of the distinguishing characteristics of the shamanic practitioner is the ability to move back and forth at will between these realities with discipline and purpose in order to heal and help others. “SEEING” IN SHAMANISM “Seeing” is an important aspect of shamanism and shamanic journeying. As Eliade remarks, “ ‘Seeing’ a spirit … is a certain sign that one has in some sort obtained a ‘spiritual condition,’ that is, that one has transcended the profane condition of humanity.”4 The word “seer” in English may refer to the ancient European shamans, those who were “see-ers.” Similarly, the Matsigenka Indians of the Upper Amazon call a shaman one “who sees.”5 At the same time, “seeing” is a gloss in shamanism for more than visualizing, for it refers to perceiving with all the senses, including hearing, touch, smell, and taste. Shamans differ from those who believe in spirits, because they know from firsthand experience that spirits exist. They see the spirits, touch them, hear them, smell them, and converse with them. This is why in many tribal societies around the world, the shaman is referred to not only as “one who sees” but also as “one who knows,” or as a “person of knowledge.” Shamans no more believe spirits exist than you believe your family, friends, and acquaintances exist. You know your family, friends, and acquaintances exist because you talk and otherwise interact with them daily. Similarly, shamans know spirits exist because they interact with them daily or, more often, nightly, for it is usually easier to see spirits in darkness. Also, darkness is an important medium for identifying spirits, for it eliminates the possibility of confusing them with the ordinary images of daylight reality. The familiar concept of the “third eye” from Eastern spiritual practices crops up elsewhere. It is often known among Australian aboriginals, for example, as the “strong eye,” located similarly in the center of the forehead. Sometimes a quartz crystal, a uniquely important stone cross.culturally in shamanism, is pressed into that center to help the beginning shaman see shamanically more clearly.6 In former times, a Paviotso shaman in America could carry a quartz crystal on the cave power quest described in Chapter 1 so as to be able afterward to “see through anything.”7 The seeing of shamans is not restricted to perceiving in darkness but commonly extends to seeing through things that in ordinary reality appear to most people as opaque. In shamanic extraction healing work, one sees or senses the illness within the sick person.8 A power to “see through anything” is a common feature of shamanic experience. This power brings its own light to penetrate darkness and matter, as Knud Rasmussen notes for the Iglulik Eskimo: The first time a young shaman experiences this light, while sitting up on the bench [in the darkened igloo] invoking his helping spirits, it is as if the house in which he is suddenly rises; he sees far ahead of him, through mountains, exactly as if the earth were one great plain, and his eyes could reach the end of the earth. Nothing is hidden from him any longer.9 In shamanism, “seeing” also involves seeing with the heart, or knowing in your heart that what you are perceiving is truth. This emotional certainty is fundamental to the experience of direct revelation and is one of the features that usually characterize shamanic seeing. In 1968 I was discussing shamanic seeing with French ethnologist Jacques Lemoine, a specialist in the shamanism of the Hmong peoples of Laos. Although an outstanding fieldworker, he had never asked the shamans if they saw images, because they had already told him that they “saw with the heart.” Therefore he assumed that no visual perception was involved. I urged him to interview one of his Hmong shaman friends further. Sure enough, a few months later he reported that they did indeed see images with their closed and covered eyes when they were doing their journeys and other work, and that they still said they saw with the heart, simply because emotional certainty was part of their direct revelations. Such an emotional certainty is also necessary for successful work in Western shamanic healing. ARE SHAMANS BORN OR MADE? For the Westerner, it is easy to assume that shamans practice their profession full-time. In fact, however, shamans usually spend most of their time doing ordinary work such as farming or hunting, food gathering and processing, and child-rearing. In the evenings, and upon request, they journey and do other shamanic work in a disciplined and controlled way. Their spiritual work in an altered state of consciousness is very intense. It is not possible even to eat a meal when doing it. So it is inconceivable that one could be working in this kind of altered state of consciousness all day on a regular basis. Shamans must be part-timers. Persons may become shamans in many different ways. In Siberia, for example, shamans might inherit the power and knowledge through their families.10 Elsewhere in Siberia, and in some places in native South America, persons might suffer a serious illness, such as smallpox, and be expected to die but then have a miraculous recovery.11 Or perhaps it was a freak accident like a lightning strike that one survived. When such a thing happened, the community members characteristically concluded that healing power had come to save the person. They then sometimes asked the power-blessed person, upon recovery, to help heal someone else who was sick. The recovered person, even if unsure of his or her ability, could hardly refuse relatives and friends in need. If, in response, he or she successfully intervened, a shaman could be born. In some indigenous societies, children were watched to see if they showed signs of being directly in touch with the spiritual realms, such as when they spontaneously sang a song apparently received from the spirits, as among the Pomo of Native California. If such signs occurred, then the children’s healing powers might be tested by the adults.12 However, even in such cases the child was rarely recognized as a full.fledged shaman until becoming an adult. Shamanic practitioners worldwide were typically mature adults, usually with their own children. In certain cultures, it was quite common to pay an established shaman for training. For example, East Greenland Eskimo shamans usually had several paid teachers.13 Among the Shuar in eastern Ecuador, the only known way to become a shaman is to buy the power, in the form of spirit helpers, from another shaman.14 The usual payment in the 1950s was in shuar kuit, or “Indian valuables.” To pay a well-known shaman for a weeklong period of training and power transmission, a man might have to spend two or three years amassing enough feather headdresses, blowguns, curare blowgun dart poison, perhaps a hunting dog, and maybe even a muzzle-loading shotgun. Today shamanism remains strong among the Shuar, but the payment is usually in major amounts of Ecuadorian currency. There are other ways, too, that one may become a shaman. In the Conibo tribe of eastern Peru, for example, the beginner, under the guidance of a shaman, may learn primarily from the spirit of a tall sacred tree (the ceiba).15 In the old days among Inuit of the Arctic, usually one of the most valued ways to become a shaman was to be initiated by the spirits in extreme isolation while suffering. To achieve this, an apprentice, under the supervision of a shaman, might spend days alone in a miniature igloo in the dead of winter without any heat, light, food, and little or no water, until the spirits brought enlightenment and healing power.16 Perhaps one of the most mysterious and distinctive ways of becoming a shaman has been through experiencing the dismemberment of one’s body in an altered state of consciousness. Accounts of this kind of initiatory experience are relatively common among Siberian tribes and Aboriginal Australian people. Later we will examine this important type of shamanic experience and its significance (see Chapter 11). While there are many ways to become a shaman, how is not as important as the strength of the helping spirits supporting a person. In other words, the crucial issue is not whether one pays a shaman, as among the Shuar, or almost starves and freezes to death in isolated darkness on the ice, as among some Inuit in the days before missionization. Rather, the issue can be stated very simply: does one’s shamanic work produce successful results for those who ask for help? If such results come, it matters little how or where one trained, or if one trained at all in a formal sense, for the people will recognize him or her as a shaman. Shamans are known by their works, and the ultimate judgment is by those on whose behalf they work for healing, divination, and other purposes. SHAMANS, PRIESTS, AND SHAMAN-PRIESTS Shamans need to be distinguished from priests. Priests, whether tribal priests or those of the major civilizations, typically lead ceremonies involving extended traditional liturgies and rituals that should be performed in a specified manner, with emphasis on prayer in honor of the spirits and gods. The ideal is to perform the public ritual perfectly without the slightest deviation in detail of prayer or offering. Such rituals can be beautiful and emotionally moving, but they are not shamanism. While shamans can and do make prayers and offerings, shamanism is very much a revelatory activity in which the shaman moves from this reality to another. There are, of course, cultures in which individuals do both priestly and shamanic work. These persons are shaman-priests. The mara’akame of the Huichol Indians of northwestern Mexico are an example of such individuals. To become a mara’akame, one must spend years learning the priestly liturgies perfectly, as priests must do in other traditions. At the same time, the mara’akame learns to change consciousness and journey with the aid of the native hallucinogens, usually peyote or datura. Some mara’akame are more priests than shamans, and others are more shamans than priests, but they typically can act as both. The medicine men and women of the Plains tribes of native North America likewise can be most accurately considered shaman-priests. Through the vision quest, the purification lodge, and other consciousness-changing practices and rituals, they learn to interact directly with the spirits, often in darkness. In addition, they learn detailed traditional public rites and prayers in order to honor the spirits recognized by the society. This normally takes years of training to perform correctly. Direct revelation is thus balanced simultaneously with ceremonial leadership in a ritual. Whether a specific medicine man or woman can be defined technically as a shaman depends heavily on their direct interaction with the spirits and partly upon whether they make journeys in an altered state of consciousness. Such journeying among Plains peoples is often a very subtle thing that cannot be easily recognized by an outsider, and is done most commonly in the Middle World. In the case of any specific medicine man or woman, it might take years for an outsider to discover whether that person makes such journeys and, if they do, whether they sometimes go beyond our Middle World. My intent in distinguishing between indigenous priests and shamans is not to make invidious comparisons, for the work done by each has its own traditional value to the community. The differences, however, ought to be kept in mind, because it would be confusing and misleading if the meaning of “shaman” were to become blurred. SHAMANS AND MEDIUMS There are many specialized shamanic practices. Mediumship (or “channeling”) is a significant example. In mediumship a helping spirit (or “guide”) comes to the medium, who, after entering an altered state of consciousness and relinquishing control, voluntarily embodies it. Shamans do this, too, to varying degrees, depending upon the needs of the situation. Doing this in shamanism goes by various names, such as voluntary possession, merging, union, or embodiment. In indigenous shamanism, the spirit merging with the shaman is often considered to be a god, goddess, or ancestor. In contrast to my position decades ago, I now acknowledge mediumship as an important aspect of shamanic practice. However, if a medium does no other kind of shamanic work, it is hard to call it full shamanism. Nineteenth-century British mediumship comes to mind as studied and described by Alfred Russel Wallace.17 Full shamans can invite a helping spirit to speak through them, answering questions, but the merging is more commonly done to bring power into the shaman to heal others. Even more distinct from mediumship is the journey of shamans to visit other worlds. The spirits who help the shamans on journeys are not called “guides,” because that is really a mediumistic term and can be confused in full shamanism with spirit animals, who may simply guide a person from one place to another on a shamanic journey. If deep in an altered state of consciousness, the fully merged shaman here in the Middle World can be relatively unconscious of what the embodied spirit is communicating, or doing, through him or her. In contrast, the journeying shaman is usually quite aware of what is happening (except in a reconstructed Sami method) and attempts to remember as many details of the journey experience as possible. Thus the shaman normally can later relate to others in detail what took place in a spirit world, whereas a shaman who has consciously “stepped aside” to facilitate mediumistic communication often emerges from the altered state with limited memory, if any, of what transpired. While the shamanic journey is seen as the most distinguishing feature of shamanism, most experienced shamans include in their practice degrees of mediumship, voluntary possession, merging, and embodiment, and they can be very important parts of their work. This is particularly true when shamans bring back a helping spirit to heal a patient or to answer questions through the shaman. The concept of the two realities is useful in understanding the subtle distinction between “merging” and “embodiment.” In nonordinary reality the shaman’s spirit, or soul, may merge or engage in union with another spirit in another world, without involving the body of the shaman remaining in the Middle World. Thus, it is not “embodiment.” However, if those spirits join together in the shaman’s body here in the Middle World, as in mediumistic work or certain kinds of shamanic healing, that can be called “embodiment,” although at a deeper level it still is a form of merging or union of the shaman’s own spirit or soul and another. Depending on the indigenous culture, a person who does only mediumship may be considered a shaman, as often is the case in Korea and parts of Southeast Asia. I have changed my earlier position on this, but nonetheless they do not appear to be full shamans. In Japan, women who are mediums specialize in being possessed by the spirits of the dead in order to help them communicate with the living. I have not read reports that they heal their clients otherwise. If they do not, then they probably should not be called shamans. The reasons for such limited or truncated shaman-like work appear lost in the mists of history. What is clear is that historical factors have greatly affected what survives as shamanism. MATERIAL ASPECTS OF SHAMANISM Indigenous peoples supply shamans and their families with food and other assistance in order to reciprocate their divinatory, healing, and other services. Shamans who help their people do not need to worry about their families going hungry. Because tribal reciprocity is more subtle than the impersonal cash exchanges of our market economy, some Westerners mistakenly have assumed that shamans do not get paid for their work, especially since such reciprocity is not mentioned publicly. By way of illustration, I once took members of a Plains Indian medicine men’s society to an international healing conference in Austria. Most of these medicine men had never done their sacred work off the reservation. At the international conference, before conducting a mass healing session, the medicine men made speeches of the type they gave on the reservation to their people. As on the reservation, they were careful to declaim, “We do not accept payment for this work.” After these speeches were made to the Europeans, the medicine men produced a profoundly impressive traditional healing session in utter darkness. When it was over and the lights came on, the audience was obviously awed and impressed. They trooped out of the room in silent respect but without leaving a single gift, having taken the holy men at their word. What the European audience did not understand was that, among the medicine men’s people, their speeches about not accepting payment were to make clear that their healing work was not done to acquire cash, and that their healing services were available to all, rich and poor. Nonetheless, on the reservation after such a healing session, almost everyone tried to leave some sort of gift behind. These gifts were usually symbolic offerings such as tobacco but often included envelopes containing significant amounts of money, given especially by the families of the patients. For the medicine men, the failure of the Europeans to leave gifts so shocked them that they refused to do another healing session the rest of the month they were scheduled to stay in Europe. Instead, they mainly watched television, especially Western movies, in their hotel rooms until time to return to America. One reason I share this story is that today in contemporary Western circles there can be a certain romantic idealism about the material side of shamanism—sometimes to such a degree that Westerners may look askance at anyone who accepts payment, other than a pouch of tobacco, for shamanic services. They should know that today among Native Americans of the Northwest Coast, it is not unusual for a person to leave a gift of a hundred dollars or more for a healing session of two hours by an outstanding shaman, with money being shared by the shaman and the assisting drummers. Similarly, among the Mono-Yokuts people of Native California in the early twentieth century, shamans were commonly given gifts of thirty to fifty dollars per healing session, the equivalent at that time of at least one or two weeks’ pay for a farm laborer.18 Repayment of obligations takes different forms in different societies, but it takes place nonetheless. In a few tribal societies, shamans may explicitly specify how much is to be paid in exchange for their services. Among the Shuar people of the Upper Amazon, the payment for a healing to an outstanding shaman traditionally was a pig, featherwork, a blowgun, a shotgun, or a combination of these. If the shaman had to travel to a patient in a distant neighborhood, often payment was required in advance! What is important is that matters of material reward not be on the minds of shamans, for such preoccupations can interfere with their necessary concentration on working generously and compassionately with the spirits to help others. Similarly, to mention payments to shamans can interfere with their being helped by compassionate spirits in the healing work. THE SPIRITUAL REWARDS OF SHAMANISM Tribal shamans may seem to work long hours. When the sun sets, their day’s ordinary chores done, they then have shamanic tasks to undertake in their community. The work at times can appear quite strenuous, involving several hours of dancing, drumming, and other physical activity, as in Siberia. In some parts of the indigenous world, well-known shamans may also be requested to make distant “house calls,” requiring them to walk, paddle, or ride horseback (or reindeer-back) significant distances to visit infirm patients, although more frequently patients and clients come to visit the shamans. The shamans’ arduous routines and the ceaseless demands of their communities have led some Western observers to wonder why anyone would want to shamanize. Indeed, it is common even for many younger relatives of a tribal shaman to express the disinclination to become a shaman, for fear that their lives would not be their own. Nevertheless, for millennia persons have become shamans. To explain this, some anthropologists have proposed that individuals become shamans in order to acquire social power and prestige. Such factors can, of course, sometimes be involved, along with the pursuit of wealth, as is the case with some Shuar in Ecuador. But looking at shamanism cross.culturally and from the inside, economic and social factors are not particularly important, for there are far greater nonmaterial rewards. What the outsiders miss, not having experiential knowledge of shamanism, is the great spiritual joy and ecstasy one commonly experiences working with the spirits and helping others who are suffering or in pain. HOW SAFE IS SHAMANISM? In my opinion, it is unsafe not to know shamanism. Virtually all humans have unconscious connections with spirits, but the vast majority of Westerners lack conscious knowledge of them and thus fail to employ them to help and protect themselves. In addition, they may use them unknowingly in nonordinary ways that may be harmful to others. For example, New York City or any major urban area is a shaman’s nightmare. There we have millions of people crowded together, often tense and under stress, commonly experiencing ungenerous feelings toward others but without any awareness or control of their power to harm others on a spiritual level. When a cartoonist draws someone “looking daggers” at someone else, it is a metaphor for the spiritual harm that people can wreak on others. Through shamanic knowledge and training, one can bring full awareness to such power so as to help, not hurt, others. Shamans all over the world know that deep feelings of hostility toward another person can result in that other person becoming seriously ill. Knowing this, shamans (not sorcerers) can exercise consciousness and discipline to control the nonordinary, or spiritual, side of their anger, only venting the ordinary side. In this way, wise and experienced shamans carefully keep their spiritual powers under control to protect the object of their anger from psychic or spiritual damage. Such shamanic self-control is not just altruistic. In shamanic cultures, it is well known that shamans can harm as well as heal; but it is also known that doing harm spiritually is a very serious mistake—not just because of ethics but because it is suicidal. In the folk wisdom of tribal societies around the world, it is taught that harmful shamanic acts, or sorcery, sooner or later backfire onto the perpetrator with a multiplier effect. Conversely, the multiplier effect that punishes shamans “gone bad” rewards those who focus their abilities on alleviating human suffering. When shamans generously use their power to heal others, the compassionate spirits usually give them even more power and help them advance on this path. SOME DIFFICULT SPIRITS OF OUR WORLD The Middle World, our home, has a complex assortment of spirits, many of which unfortunately have limited compassion, or none at all, and can even be the source of illness and trouble. Others can be positive beings, as are many nature spirits, and helpers, most famously the power animal, a spirit type that we will discuss shortly. Here I will offer only brief sketches of some problematical Middle World spirits, since they are not the focus of this book. QUASI-COMPASSIONATE ETHNOCENTRIC SPIRITS Some spirits of deceased persons have significant determination and power to remain in the Middle World to look after their surviving family members. They are typically the spirits of people who possessed considerable power during their lifetime but lost it, usually very late in life. The deceased person’s power spirit usually lingers in the Middle World in haunts that had long been familiar to it. This is the kind of spirit that my Shuar companions were depending upon to protect them at that river crossing. It is also the kind of power spirit that traditional Inuit, for example, sought for their children by giving them the name of a deceased relative that they admired for hunting and other manifestations of power. By bestowing the name upon a child, they hoped to attract the same power to the child for his or her adult life. These quasi-compassionate ethnocentric spirits usually provide power and protection only to their own descendants. As their intent is to protect and help their own successive generations, they are not fully compassionate in the sense that they may also undertake hostile action against outsiders who seem to threaten their descendants, their sacred places and objects, and their interests. In other words, they are both compassionate and hostile, depending upon with whom they are dealing. An Illustration: The Shuar (Jívaro) Until the spiritual culture of the Shuar significantly deteriorated during the last half of the twentieth century under the impact of missionization and colonization, they sought the power of an ancestor to make them resistant to illness and misfortune, and to avoid being killed in a hostile world of feuds and warfare. In short, the power was to ensure deserving descendants a long life. Young men would seek power at distant sacred waterfalls, while the women sought their power spirits within the shelter of small lean-tos in the forest close to their homes. Both genders used hallucinogens to help them perceive the spirits.19 As the men were the warriors, the power was considered especially important for their protection and success against enemies. There were two stages to the male Shuar’s classic vision or power quest—the first one was the vision itself, the arutam, usually at a sacred waterfall. As I described in my book The Jívaro, the power seeker suffered from hunger, exhaustion, and cold prior to getting a vision at a remote waterfall. If the suffering pilgrim was successful, a typically frightening vision came for a few seconds and tested the person’s bravery and seriousness of purpose. The second part of this quest usually occurred the next night during the questing person’s descent from the waterfall. At that time, the person slept beside the rapid of a river and hoped for a dream, which was the real transmission of the power. If the dream came, it mostly was in the form of an appearance by a Shuar warrior, in traditional tribal dress, who spoke to the dreamer more or less in this fashion: “I am your ancestor. Just as I have killed many times, so will you. Just as I have lived a long time, so will you.” Immediately a feeling of power permeated the body of the dreamer, who usually then awoke, feeling an urge to kill. These local ancestral spirits were expected by the Shuar not only to give them strength and well-being, but also to give them power in killing their families’ enemies. These ethnocentric spirits were those of persons who before or after dying resolved to continue to protect their descendants. They retained the Middle World prejudices they nourished when alive, so their compassion was mixed with hostility and even vengeance.However, as I learned living with the Shuar, an outsider does not necessarily have to be a descendant to come under the protection of an ethnocentric power if the outsider has been helping its descendants. This may help explain my success at the waterfall and, years later, at the cave. Even so, the spirit’s protective power can be subsequently taken away from strangers, and even descendants, who behave in ways that do not honor the ancestor. Not only may these ethnocentric spirits take away the protective power, they may even exact vengeance on outsiders who have failed to protect sacred objects and places where the ancestral spirits reside. The Example of the Nganasan Idol A possible example of the vengeful side of a quasi-compassionate ethnocentric power is the main spiritual protector of the Nganasan people of western Siberia. This spirit is considered to be merged with an impressive carved anthropomorphic wooden figure (see Plate 5). The Nganasan have traditionally treated the figure with extreme reverence, leaving it in the care of a shaman with the responsibility of keeping the spirit content by communicating with it and making offerings. As with other ethnocentric spirits, its compassion does not usually extend to outsiders, and especially not to tribes that have been enemies of the Nganasan. When going into battle against other tribes, the Nganasan carried this wooden image on a special sled, which seems somewhat analogous to the sacred ark that the ancient Hebrews carried into battle. This wooden carving was of unknown age among the Nganasan, but certainly very old. It had a difficult history during the last couple of centuries, having been stolen from the Nganasan at least once and later recovered. In the mid-twentieth century it was in the care of the most famous Nganasan shaman, but, being old, he was worried about what would happen to it after he died. So he passed it on to a friend, the Russian ethnologist Yuri Simchenko, for safekeeping at his apartment in Moscow in order that it would not fall into the wrong hands. In the 1980s, during a period of social and economic upheaval in the then Soviet Union, food became scarce in Moscow, and Yuri Simchenko soon was desperate for funds to feed his family. He contacted a visiting Finnish ethnologist to see if the Nganasan figure could be sold in the West to get some money for food. Heimo Lappalainen agreed to help and smuggled the carving out of Russia. Heimo, a friend and colleague, then contacted me, explaining how he needed to sell it at Yuri’s request, and told me Simchenko’s price. Heimo and I agreed that we did not want to let the object be lost by selling it on the open market. So money was found to buy the carving from Yuri for the Foundation for Shamanic Studies. On behalf of the Foundation, I kept it in our home, covered and stored in a safe place. My intention was to return the power object to the Nganasan people when the political and economic situations in the former Soviet Union settled down and made it safe to do so. I treated it with respect and care, offering the image tastes of foods that I presumed the Nganasan people ate, and making assurances that I would get it home. I had long since concluded that spirits were real. Then I noted that a curious series of fatalities occurred as the “idol” was taken farther and farther away from its own people. First the Nganasan shaman, Seime, died soon after turning over the figure to Yuri Simchenko. Then when Simchenko transferred the figure to Heimo Lappalainen to take to Finland, Simchenko died, and then when Heimo left the figure with me in America and returned to Finland, he died as well. Needless to say, this chain of events had a healthy effect on my conscientiousness, and I mentally elevated the spirit to deity-status just to be on the safe side. Over the subsequent years I kept giving it traditional offerings. Finally, a few years ago, after many difficulties and false starts in Russia, the Foundation was able to return the object successfully to the Nganasan people through a meeting and ceremonial exchange at the Russian Academy of Sciences in Moscow. There Dr. Bill Brunton of the Foundation turned it over to a representative of the Nganasan people who, with her companions, was to take the idol back to Siberia. Bill noted that she was observably nervous and trembling as she accepted the power object, spoke to it, and gave it offerings. She and her entourage later reported, apparently with some relief, that their trip home to Siberia had gone amazingly well. For my part, I’m happy to relate that by all accounts, Bill Brunton and I both are still alive. THE AMORAL SPIRITS AND SORCERY Among important spirits of the Middle World are the amoral powers, who lack even the narrow compassion of the ethnocentric spirits. Use of these powers to affect the lives of others without their permission is a symptom of sorcery. These amoral spirits, whose effective realm is the Middle World, include the spirits of elements and the spirits of certain small objects and creatures, such as the tsentsak of the Shuar, which are “bribed” with tobacco to do whatever their “master” wishes, whether a shaman or a sorcerer. A form of sorcery once common in Europe involves the use of the spirits of the four elements, earth, air, fire, and water, all of which are amoral. Wood, an Asian-named fifth element, can also play a (usually less recognized) role. A present-day European survival of such sorcery was described to me by an Irish woman whose grandmother taught her how to “source” the elements to provide her with their power by rubbing dirt from the garden (earth) or charcoal (fire) from the fireplace on the forehead.20 (One could speculate that this “sourcery” may be the origin of the English word “sorcery,” despite the slight variation in spelling.) Being amoral, the spirits of the elements lack compassion and simply provide power to reinforce whatever a sorcerer is attempting to do, whether for good or bad. Using these Middle World spirits, a sorcerer is tempted to affect and even damage other people’s lives,21 quite in contrast to the ethics of core shamanism, which emphasize the help of the transcended compassionate spirits dwelling in the Upper or Lower Worlds. If a shaman were for some reason to “go bad” and attempt to cause pain and suffering to another person or being, such compassionate spirits typically take back the powers they had lent to the shaman. Once this happens, the now powerless person is no longer able to heal others and, without the protection of that power, may become seriously ill or die if in a society where sorcery is prevalent. A Classic Case of Sorcery: The Shuar Again The Shuar (Jívaro) provide a good example of troubles that can occur when shamans are limited to the Middle World, as I first learned among them more than half a century ago. Working with Middle World spirits is both complicated and dangerous, and this was the world of the Shuar shamans. They did not ascend to the Upper World and went only a very short distance toward the Lower World—that is, only into the lakes and the rivers. A society that is thus limited to Middle World spirits tends to be strong on bewitching (sorcery). I shall use the past tense in writing about their practices, although I learn from visiting Shuar that much of what I describe still continues covertly. Overt bloodshed, however, is said to have declined due to the intervention of the Ecuadorian police. Among the Shuar during my time in the field, this situation was aggravated by a strong spiritual dependence on an amoral spirit, the element water, which was implicitly emphasized as an underlying source of power. Rather than being sourced directly, as in the Irish case cited earlier, it was the common denominator of some of the most powerful spirits, including the local ancestors dwelling at the sacred waterfalls; the first and eternal shaman, Tsunki, dwelling underwater; and the boa constrictor in the lagoons. Shamans worked with such spirits to indirectly source the power of water. Shuar shamans worked with other amoral spirits besides those of the elements. Both the good and bad shamans typically had small helping spirits, such as those of insects, snakes, and thorns that, depending on the type, were usually called tsentsak or tunchi. The “good” or healing shamans used them for curing patients, while the “bad” shamans employed them for bewitching. Both these types were quite amoral and ready to be “bribed” by the shamans to help them. The tsentsak and tunchi spirits love tobacco, so shamans attracted and retained their services by ingesting an infusion of green-tobacco-leaf water day and night to feed and keep them merged with the shaman’s body. Almost all Shuar shamans kept the spirits of these small helpers merged with their bodies not only to assist them in healing patients, but also to protect themselves from attacks by wawek or yahauchï uwishin (shamans “gone bad” who became sorcerers). For example, the tsentsak could gather together as shields to protect their “masters” when incoming tsentsak and tunchi “missiles” were sent by sorcerers to kill or seriously injure them. The Shuar were formerly involved in long and bloody feuds. In the course of those armed conflicts, shamans would understandably get angry at the murderer of a family member or close relative. Some, unable to control their anger, would then use their power to retaliate shamanically against the perpetrator. This was considered a big mistake, and shamans who did this were known, even to their close relatives, as having become “bad” shamans or wawek, in recognition of the fact that they had not only deviated from the shamanic ideal of helping to alleviate suffering and pain, but were also working in the opposite way. If they engaged in spiritually hostile acts against a relative, they could anger a common ethnocentric ancestral spirit attempting to guard its descendants. Consequently, the spirit could be expected to remove its power from such a shaman, with only the “perfume” of the power remaining and then continually dwindling. When the power had completely vanished, such persons were shamans no more. They now became victims of their own acts, for they had lost their protective power. Reportedly in a year and a half or less, they were expected to meet calamitous and painful deaths, such as by sorcerers and other enemies.22 Beyond the Shuar, and in general, such sorcery has a karmic-like effect that eventually hurts or kills the sorcerer. THE SUFFERING BEINGS Also in the Middle World are the spirits of deceased persons who are involuntarily here, unlike quasi-compassionate ethnocentric spirits that have chosen to remain. They normally do not have much power but still can be a widespread source of illness. These spirits most commonly do not know that they are dead, and they are aware that they are lonely and usually unhappy. For this reason, they are often called “suffering beings,” or sometimes “wandering” or “lost” souls. In their unhappiness, they may seek to enter a living person’s body/mind or simply be hovering close to that person. In doing so, they typically reinforce the illusion that they are still alive, as they have merged with or attached to the living person. They not only can influence dreams, but the “memories of those deceased beings may become confused with the dreams of the living person, with the result that living persons may assume erroneously that they are having their own past-life experiences.”23 The person who is subjected to such an influence will not only be affected in dreams. In more extreme cases, he or she can become confused to the point of being unable to continue to function adequately as a member of society. Thus, troubles of a spirit nature can have serious repercussions in a person’s health and community life. It is the task of the shaman, when requested, to heal such persons with spiritual help. 5 The Journey to Other Worlds Given ethnocentric spirits, as well as other spirit problems and conflicts of our Middle World, it is not surprising that some shamans leave for other worlds where they can find and enlist the help of unconditionally compassionate spirits, hereafter simply referred to as the “compassionate spirits,” who provide divine knowledge, wisdom, healing knowledge, and power to help shamans and their patients. This is the approach of many of the “sky shamans” in Siberian Tuva and other shamans elsewhere on the planet who specialize in getting help from the compassionate spirits or beings beyond our world. It is also a significant reason for the use of the journey in core shamanism, based upon experience and experimentation by many thousands of Westerners over approximately four decades. The shaman’s journey (sometimes called the “magical flight” or “soul journey”) to the worlds above and below us in another reality is a distinctive aspect of shamanism compared to other spiritual traditions.1 The main purpose of these journeys is to obtain extraordinary knowledge and help from the other worlds for others or for oneself. Consequently, the shamanic journey is often a centerpiece of shamanism, engaging fully compassionate spirits of other worlds to effect “impossible” (i.e., miraculous) results in healing and divination. In this work, the shaman is not merely a supplicant so much as someone actively engaged with a helping spirit to alleviate the suffering and illness of another. Through this temporary but intimate alliance, shamans in indigenous cultures are typically expected by their peoples to produce healing and helping results beyond those available from prayer alone. THE SHAMAN’S THREE WORLDS The journeys of the shamans involve three worlds: the one below us, popularly called the underworld; the one above us, often called the heavens; and the one in between, where we live, the Middle World. I first became aware of the importance of distinguishing them while living and learning shamanism with the Conibo people of the Ucayali River region of eastern Peru in 1960–61. Several years later (1964), in reading Mircea Eliade’s book, newly published in English, I realized the widespread cross-cultural existence of the concept, which he sometimes referred to as the “three cosmic zones,” stacked one above the other along the Axis Mundi, or World Tree.2 Instead of three cosmic “zones,” I have long preferred the term “the three worlds,” for indeed there is a whole world to be discovered above us in nonordinary reality, and another below us, with multiple levels or zones within each. Thus, we usefully speak of the Upper, Middle (ours), and Lower Worlds. (See Plates 6 and 7.) In addition, there exist what I call “Interworlds,” narrow bands of particular spirits at the interfaces of the Middle World with the Upper and Lower ones. I discovered these in the late 1970s while doing soul.retrieval work. An Interworld resembles what is commonly called “limbo.” More about that later. The preceding remarks do not exclude the possibility of other worlds horizontally at the extremities of the Middle World, or that both the Upper and Lower ones may unite around us as a kind of cosmic sphere. A great and exciting exploration of nonordinary reality continues to beckon. LEVELS Cross-cultural reports on the number of levels in each world vary considerably, and counts can be affected by individual experiences and by cultural constraints related to counting. In many nonliterate populations, people rarely needed to count beyond their fingers, perhaps partly because the needs of civilization for counting with regard to tribute, taxation, and commerce had not yet become part of their lives. In such groups, as in the Peruvian Amazon, shamans seem to have enumerated only a few levels in the Upper and Lower Worlds. In contrast, shamans living close to major civilizations where counting was well developed (such as in China) reported the greatest number of levels. In Inner Asian and Siberian societies, shamans counted up to forty-nine levels or “skies” in the Upper World. “Official” statements about the number of levels or about characteristics are not part of core shamanic methodology. Instead individual shamanic journeyers draw working conclusions as they progress in their firsthand investigations. As people practice shamanic journeying, they gradually become acquainted with the sequences of levels in the Upper and Lower Worlds, what is to be found on them, and under what circumstances. TRANSITION ZONES OR “BARRIERS” Like core shamanism in general, the following information was arrived at inductively through cross-cultural study, experimentation, and practice. Three main barriers have been noticed involving the two realities in shamanic work. The barriers are also sometimes called “transition zones.” People, when trained, normally can cross all of them relatively easily with the help of auditory driving. Spirits, however, usually are not able to cross them without some shamanic help. A notable exception is the power animal, which commonly seems to be able to transcend all barriers with ease. The first is the important barrier between ordinary and nonordinary reality, which is transcended by shifting from the OSC to the SSC, as noted earlier. For about 90 percent of Westerners, this can be easily facilitated by means of adequately loud and repetitious drumming in the range of about 220 beats per minute, coupled with a basic knowledge of shamanism and a serious intention to enter the other reality for some planned purpose.Once in NOR, the shaman may work primarily here in the Middle World, going in and out of NOR as is common in certain types of healing, and calling in help from another world, or going to it. That latter choice brings us to the second type of barrier, the one between this, the Middle World, and the others. Stereotypical and mundane as it may sound, the barrier to the Upper World is commonly a cloud layer or a membrane of some type, sometimes with a hole in it. It is usually transcended easily, although doing this may take practice. The third type of barrier is within the Upper World and often presents itself as another cloud layer or membrane. Typically, this third type of barrier is transcended with the least difficulty. There is no fixed number of these; each person has to discover this individually. Also at times the levels may expand or collapse together, like an accordion. The situation for the Lower World is analogous. The first barrier separates the Middle World from the Lower and is usually earth or water with passage made by means of a tunnel. The subsequent barriers are typically more easily transcended, usually by using tunnels. As with the Upper World, each person has to discover the number of these. THE CENTER OF THE UNIVERSE Shamans’ maps are in their minds. Therefore it is essential for them to know where they start from, just as a surveyor must use a benchmark as a reference point from which all mapping is done. As shamans make more journeys from the same departure locations, they are able to add more and more details to their mental maps. The departure places are ones that shamans know firsthand in ordinary reality. Usually each shaman has one specific departure site from which he or she repeatedly starts for the Upper World and another one from which to start for the Lower World. These departure points become fixed in a shaman’s mind, to be visualized and utilized over and over again in order to travel with the greatest accuracy into the vast cosmos of nonordinary reality. Whatever departure point a shaman uses, it becomes for each the Center of the Universe, since all subsequent mental mapping proceeds from the points used. If a shaman uses one place to depart for the Upper World and another for the Lower World, each is the Center of Universe in terms of mapping the journeys made from that point. Since the shamans know the distance and direction in the Middle World of these two departure sites, they can easily map their Upper and Lower World discoveries in relation to them. Sometimes shamans have a single special departure place for going both up and down. In such a case, the coordinated mapping of the Upper and Lower Worlds is even easier. In these journeys, one can travel “outside of time” through a normally imperceptible universe otherwise known mainly through dream and myth. “Outside of time” is the fortuitous phrase coined by distinguished Russian ethnographer Waldemar Bogoras to describe the journeys of the Siberian tribal shamans about whom he published in the early twentieth century.3 While there is no evidence that Bogoras undertook shamanic training and practice himself, he did seem to understand and respect the profound cosmic nature of the shamans’ experiences during their journeys.4 The late Siberian shaman Tubiyaku, of the Nganasan people, asked my Russian ethnologist friend, the now-deceased Yuri Simchenko, to get him a computer, of whose abilities he had heard. As Tubiyaku’s memory was declining, he needed help to remember what discoveries he had made where in his shamanic journeys. Without electricity and a knowledge of computers, saving his memories in this way was not possible. Now Tubiyaku has long since passed on, and his knowledge with him. However, today we do commonly have electricity and computers, so it is possible to record and map one’s own discoveries. And that brings us to the Shamanic Knowledge Conservatory. THE SHAMANIC KNOWLEDGE CONSERVATORY In the 1960s I began amassing a large library of publications connected with shamanism. Then, in the 1970s, I also began collecting the accounts of Western students who made shamanic journeys or who had other kinds of shamanic experiences. Today these form part of the Foundation’s Shamanic Knowledge Conservatory, which also includes a vast collection of publications connected with indigenous shamanism, as well as shamanic artifacts. The purpose of collecting the Western reports was to see “if there was anything out there.” Like a good old-fashioned ethnographer, I accepted the stories of the “natives” (in this case, Westerners) without judgment and recognized my responsibility to preserve them for future generations to study and to compare to non-Western accounts of the Upper and Lower Worlds. Also I was frankly curious to see what they found, and I wanted at some point to personally compare them to firsthand indigenous accounts unaffected by Westernization, which so far has been a vain hope.5 Eventually, with the support and help of many persons, including donors, Foundation members, former students, and a few dedicated staff members,6 we expanded and formalized the procedure by setting up the Mapping of Nonordinary Reality project (MONOR) as part of the work of the Foundation for Shamanic Studies. (The “mapping” term is meant primarily to cover written descriptions but also includes diagrammatic maps. See Plates 8 and 9.) Today the Foundation carefully preserves these irreplaceable reports in the Western Archives of its Shamanic Knowledge Conservatory in Marin County, California, as well as at secure locations elsewhere in North America and Europe. The Western Archives are unique in the world because of their content and size. As of the last count, made June 25, 2007, the archives included 2,528 accounts of shamanic ascension to the Upper World by Westerners, with more added since. As of April 15, 2008, the archives had accumulated records of 2,397 descents to the Lower World. In recent years, I decided to make a “Celestia Study” of the Upper World documents. The ascension experiences in the following pages were selected from that study as representative examples. Because of limitations of time and resources, it has not yet been possible to undertake an equivalent “Netheria Study” of Lower World experiences. Each person’s description of a shamanic journey is a cosmographic fact, just as in classic anthropological fieldwork each informant’s statement is an ethnographic fact, recorded as such in the fieldworker’s notebook. In the pages that follow, I sometimes group statements of the various Westerners into broad categories with little individual analysis on my part. Generally I try to resist the temptation to go farther. There are good reasons for this. First, the journeys are so individually rich with multiple experiences that their grouping according to a single experience does not do them justice. Secondly, I wish to encourage readers to make such observations themselves and to feel free to exercise their spiritual independence.The approach of the following pages tries to reflect this view. One caveat: sometimes I do offer suggestions or speculations. These are not offered as dogma but as personal ideas intended to stimulate the thinking of others. Ultimately, interpreting the meaning of an Upper World experience is the province of the experiencer. It is virtually impossible to know the total significance of what happened to another person in nonordinary reality. Even that person may not realize much of an experience’s significance without doing additional ascensions for more information. Unfortunately, it was not possible to undertake follow-up interviews with the Westerners and include hindsight commentaries in this book.7 The accounts are typically presented as originally given. For the requirements of this book, they are sometimes edited for conciseness, but virtually all the originals are preserved in the Shamanic Knowledge Conservatory. One last note: the terms “Westerners” and “students” are interchangeable in the following pages since they refer to the same population, virtually all being persons who at some point participated as students in the North American core shamanism programs of the Foundation for Shamanic Studies. 6 The Westerners’ First Journeys: The Lower World and Power Animals My second helping spirit was a shark. One day when I was out in my kayak, it came swimming up to me, lay alongside quite silently and whispered my name. I was greatly astonished, for I had never seen a shark before; they are very rare in these waters. Afterwards it helped me with my hunting, and was always near me when I had need of it. —Aua, an Iglulik Eskimo shaman1 In The Way of the Shaman, I wrote about how power animal retrieval was done for another person and mentioned how soul retrieval was done in a similar way.2 That exercise was aimed to reconnect other persons to any power animals they had, or still had, not to obtain a new power animal—typically a more demanding process, as illustrated by my cave experience (see Chapter 1). Now I wish to describe an introductory or practice journey given to Westerners to help them develop a close relationship with at least one power animal as a helper through doing divination work with its assistance. The examples in this chapter of how this was done were primarily drawn from the Foundation’s Shamanic Knowledge Conservatory. The Lower World was chosen for this subject mainly because plant and animal life, including power animals, seem more easily encountered there than in the Upper World, although they are found in both. If the relationship is good, power animals can easily join the journeyer in traversing all three worlds. An animal that regularly can be depended on to answer questions or otherwise help a person is, by definition, a helping animal of that individual. If, as in the journeys below, one is given the help of an answer by an animal, or help through a ride by an animal, then the journeyer knows, simply put, that it is a helping animal! By the way, there is no “official” restriction on how many there may be for one person. Such helping animals in nonordinary reality are commonly known as “power animals,” following the general introduction of the term in 1980.3 THE HELP AND WISDOM OF POWER ANIMALS In shamanic cultures all over the world, one finds the shamans conscious of special nonordinary animal companions or helpers, commonly referred to in the anthropological literature as “guardian spirits.”4 Other names for these animal helpers in the literature include: tutelary spirits, assistant totems, guardian angels, and familiars. Such guardians are not unique to shamans, for in their cultures it is assumed that almost everyone needs spiritual help, whether from guardian spirits or other powers, to reach adulthood. Shamans, however, are different from most other people in that they know who their guardian spirits are, simply because they repeatedly interact with them firsthand in nonordinary reality. Among Native Americans of the Northwest Coast of North America, the guardian spirit is commonly called a “power animal.”5 I personally prefer to use this term because it reminds us of the powerful forces that the animal brings to the person with whom it is connected. The power animal, or guardian spirit, might be compared to an electric transformer or adapter that receives the immense power of the universe and modulates it into a form that can be safely transmitted to a human. The immensity of the power is one of the reasons shamans work with intermediary “powers,” such as power animals, rather than calling upon the total universe itself. This power is something like energy, and native peoples sometimes translate it as “energy” when speaking to Westerners. The concept of power, however, is more than just “energy” as we usually know it, which I discussed earlier in Chapter 1. This power also has knowledge and can pass qualities on to the individual human. So this power is not exactly the same as the “energy” defined in college physics classes. The guardian angels of Christianity, being guardian spirits, resemble power animals in some of their roles and functions if not in their understood appearance. This similarity is often recognized by native peoples. For example, several years ago I was working with an elderly native Hawaiian lady who is a healer and a proud repository of her people’s knowledge. Missionaries, however, have been operating in Hawaii for approximately a century and three-quarters and, as a result, Christian and Hawaiian spiritual concepts have become interwoven in native Hawaiian cosmology. Thus, she used the English term “guardian angels” for power animals or guardian spirits. One of the Hawaiian “guardian angels,” by the way, is Shark, something I am not sure that the missionaries would have comprehended, although the Iglulik Eskimo shaman quoted at the beginning of this chapter would have understood completely.Power animals are not by any means the sole power connection that shamans have with the universe. There is almost an infinite variety of plant helpers, spirits of elements, of places, of heavenly bodies, of ancestors, and so on, with whom shamans work. The power animals, however, seem to be almost ubiquitous in shamanic practice. Perhaps this is partially because we have a close connection to the other animals, and perhaps because the power animals, as animals, are highly mobile and will come whenever the shamans call for assistance. The importance of the power animal goes far beyond calling it for assistance. Power animals connect one to the incredible power of the universe and modulate it in a form that does not overwhelm the individual human. Shamans and others who have such spiritual guardians become themselves power-filled, or power-full, and stay that way as long as they remain connected to these spiritual representatives of the universe. Power animals tend to be compassionate spirits who particularly help those who act in a like vein, such as by healing others. If someone they help stops acting compassionately, they do not seem to punish that person but simply withdraw their help. Unless new power sources are acquired, that person’s power will gradually dwindle until they lose protection from illness and misfortune. This power connection is viewed in shamanic cultures as making people resistant to disease and misfortune, something like a force field that both surrounds and pervades the person. With that power, not only is the person protected, but life goes more smoothly, as though riding the current of a river. Power animals tend to come and go, just as other spiritual connections may be temporary. An important part of shamanism, therefore, is to maintain one’s spiritual power connections for health and success in life. Indeed, if shamans or other persons find themselves seriously ill or experiencing other misfortune, it usually means that their power animals and other helping spirits have left them.6 When people lose such spiritual connections, as the Indian peoples in the Amazon explained to me many years ago, then they are in danger. There is a lag, however, for as the Shuar poetically pointed out, “the power is like perfume.”7 That is, the power will linger for a time after the actual connection is gone. So for a brief period one is still protected by the lingering, but dwindling, power.Shamans, unlike most other people, do not have to wait until things go wrong in their lives to realize that they have lost their spiritual power connections. Through the journey method they can discover, well before the symptoms of power loss or powerlessness occur, whether they are still connected to their power animals. The method is simple: when they repeatedly journey and call upon their power animals for help, and no power animal appears, then the shamans realize their power animals have left them. Knowing this before misfortune occurs makes it possible for shamans to take action to get the power connection restored. An important method for doing this is called “power animal retrieval,” described by me elsewhere.8 The power of these nonordinary animal helpers includes the ability to answer our questions. One might wonder, however, how people know if they can trust the answers the power animals give. In reply, the standards are the same as those that people apply in ordinary reality to learn whether they can trust a specific doctor, lawyer, or other acquaintance, and the trust is determined by their track records. If people consistently provide you with reliable advice and help, you learn to trust them. In other words, in both ordinary and nonordinary reality, we are working with knowledge based upon firsthand experience. Here is a comment by a student: “For me the experience that animals possess the power of knowledge, wisdom, and intelligence was new. I found that I could accept that they had something to teach me which I had not yet touched on in other spiritual disciplines.” In shamanism, individuals should conduct their own personal experiments in nonordinary reality and arrive at their own conclusions regarding the reliability of experiences and the answers received. DEPARTING FOR THE LOWER WORLD Most adults have, or have had, compassionate spirit support in their lives, but in Western culture they generally seem not aware of it, nor of its common manifestation as an animal. The Westerners whose accounts were used in the Celestia Study generally had already discovered the identity of their preexisting personal power animals in the Lower World, and they had usually read about them in The Way of the Shaman. In that book9 I described common locations used by indigenous shamans to depart for the Lower World, so I will just touch lightly on the subject now. The departure places mentioned here are among those known to indigenous shamans and used successfully by contemporary Westerners. Additional sites are noted in Appendix B. Suggested departure points include a hole in a specific location, a cave, a spring or well, a lake, a bay of an ocean, a tree with a hole in it (for entering the tree and going down), a whirlpool, and a waterfall’s pool (or an entrance behind the waterfall). Whatever the entrance is, it must be firmly located in the Middle World and known firsthand in ordinary reality to the journeyer. Many places look alike in nonordinary reality, but this does not mean they are the same place. Accordingly, it is important that journeyers not simply close their eyes and visualize any cave or other type of departure place without knowing that it is located in the Middle World and where that site is. Otherwise journeys to the Lower World cannot be reliably mapped from it. A HOLE IN A SPECIFIC LOCATION A hole in the earth is a common departure place for going to the Lower World. If one knows a cellar doorway but has never gone through it down the steps, that too has the potential of being used as a departure point, because it provides a transition from the known to the unknown. Carl Jung’s famous journey down through a cellar was a spontaneous parallel of the shaman’s method of departing for the Lower World.10 However, for most Westerners, a cave or opening into the earth usually is more successful. A LAKE OR BAY Among the Native American peoples of Northern California, the shamans would sometimes descend through remote mountain lakes they had visited and by which they had slept.11 JOURNEYS TO MEET AN ANIMAL Although both human and animal spirits can be found in the Lower World, the animals tend to be more common.12 To encourage the success of Westerners new to journeying, they are often asked to make their first journey simply to meet an animal, any animal, without any further mission. Here is an example. THE HORSE DANCER Upon exiting the dark cavern, I confronted an immense landscape bathed with bright, almost blinding, light. I found myself standing before a golden plain scattered with sagebrush. I walked down a slope toward an open corral occupied by several white horses. As I approached them, there was one that seemed to command my attention. We looked at each other eye to eye and soon became locked in an intense, almost hypnotic connection. Eventually we began a very vigorous and rhythmic dance together. The white horse would toss its mane about wildly, lifting her front legs in the air, then pounding them into the earth. Sometimes she would raise her front legs so high that she seemed to grow in size, towering above me. It was during these moments when her face would appear to be more like a woman’s, though magical in appearance. Her mane would become a tousle of white hair; the elongated horse face would turn into the attractive face of a young, beautiful woman. We danced for an immeasurable duration. Feeling exhausted, I wanted to stop and, instead, to climb onto her back for a ride. At first she seemed reluctant to allow me such a request. But after I persisted, she finally calmed down and approached me with gentler movements. But before I could climb onto her back, I heard the drumming signal to return to the Middle World. My ride would have to happen some other time.13 The above journey illustrates the frequently experienced mythical nature of shamanic journeys. In this case, the horse’s face becomes that of “a young, beautiful woman.” The ability of an animal to reveal its human side is well known to shamans in tribal cultures, and it is part of the reason the term “animal people” is used and why animals and humans are often mythically united as one. This account also illustrates the reality of the experience for the journeyer, for she became exhausted dancing with the womanhorse. Thus, this journey illustrates both the “mythic realm” and the “reality” that shamans encounter via journeys. RIDING THE WOLF In the next example of a beginner’s journey simply to meet an animal, the person was hoping to meet an eagle. Instead, she encountered a wolf, which she reported “completely surprised me.” Such encounters with the unexpected are typical of shamanic journeying, and they are part of the reason experienced shamanic journeyers no longer worry about whether they are “making up” what is happening in the shamanic state of consciousness. They have come to understand that normal psychological models do not easily explain many of the mysteries of shamanism. Here is her account, narrated as the journey was happening, using simultaneous narration (for information on this technique, see this page). Her departure place for the Lower World was a pond located in a mountainous region in upstate New York. I’ve turned the tape on, it’s beginning to play the drum sound. I’m lying on the floor trying to get relaxed … not much going on yet … I’m peering into the frog pond … just looking into it before I decide to get into this pond … little unhatched frogs … I’ve got my feet in … it’s kinda scary. I’ve let my whole body in … the first sensation is I’m up to my neck in cool water … I just decide to dive in. There’s a space in the rocks down below. I find a way to get my body around the rocks and there’s water over me … my body feels real relaxed, real loose. I feel like I’m being sucked down into a passage. It’s very bright, though. It seems like there’s a lot of light, although I’m underwater and can breathe easily. It’s almost as though the drum is like the water, beating.I’m moving that fast … I can hear the sound of wolves, but don’t see anything yet, like they’re far away. I see a big black hairy animal. He’s very black. My body’s very hot right now. It’s like I’m moving through the tunnel, but I see this black fuzzy dog—no, it’s a wolf. He’s got his head up … my body feels very hot. He’s got his head up, like he’s singing to the moon. I’m in a place that’s very dark, it’s nighttime. It’s an open area. It’s weird ’cause I don’t remember coming out of the tunnel. The tunnel just opened out onto this space where there’s a lot of snow. There are a lot of stars. It’s huge, vast, open, there’s nothing on the horizon. It’s very bright because of the stars and there’s this black wolf … he has very yellow eyes and he’s looking at me now. I’m looking at him, he’s looking at me, and we’re not moving. I feel something very deep in my belly, like fear. His tongue is hanging out of his mouth and he’s just looking at me. The stars are very bright. It’s like we’re hypnotizing each other. I can’t really move. I feel adrenaline pumping in my body like I’m afraid, and I know I should be afraid. His eyes just say “I belong here.” (Me or the wolf? I’m not sure.) He points with his snout for me to look at the stars. I’m supposed to look at a particular constellation … I think it’s the Pleiades. I saw these stars in Peru last summer. The drums seem to be company. It feels lonely here, but this wolf is with me. I feel like I’m him. I feel like I have become the wolf looking at these stars.I feel like there’s this expansive openness and I start running. I feel the wind in my ears … very fast … I’m moving very fast, my legs pumping. It’s almost as though the snow is very hard, it just slides, glides beneath me, it doesn’t give. Moving very, very fast … very, very fast. It’s almost as though moving so fast we (I) could fly.… Now I’m riding the wolf, the wolf is taking me and we can fly. We’re flying, my body is shivering, I feel so cold. I’m freezing, very, very cold. I’m riding his back. My body’s shivering and it feels like he’s taking me up to one star. It’s getting bright, very, very bright. Big sister … I don’t know where that … Big sister star, brother wolf, sister star. We’re on a knoll now on another plane. It’s still nighttime, we’re still in the open. Now I see a white wolf … very black around its mouth, a pink tongue. I think it’s a shewolf. She’s beautiful. She wants to run with us … We’re running together, I’m still on the hewolf’s back. We’re now on the round again and we’re going closer … closer and closer to … to a crest, and over the crest. We leap across a large iceflow. They’re together, they’re playing, we’re all playing in the snow. It’s beautiful. The stars are magnificent. Moving very fast. The drums seem to be slowing down, the drums are there. I don’t understand it: the drums seem to be going very very slow. We’re moving much, much faster. Phew! A shooting star, like a comet, it just dropped in the sky. Just dropped onto the horizon. It’s very bright. So we go over to it. It’s very bright. It’s a crystal! A crystal has dropped in the snow. It’s a pure, clear stone. There is a face in the stone. I’m left looking at the stone. There’s a … a brown face, it has two almond-shaped eyes … he’s looking … Oh, I just got it! It’s like I’m looking up through ice. I’ve been traveling under ice and I have to find the opening, the hole. And there’s this face looking down at me and it begins to chip away. And it makes an opening for me. It’s a fisherperson, a person who’s fishing. I climb out of the hole. So I’m the one who’s been trapped underneath. Think I must have been in the tunnel all this time, but it felt like a wide-open space. It’s brilliant daylight. It’s like the tundra and there’s a sled and a person, like an Eskimo, who’s been fishing there. He looks at me, or she looks at me, and we just look at each other. Very dark brown eyes. And he’s talking to me, but I don’t understand what he’s saying to me. I don’t know who this is … I’m trying to tell him about my friend the wolf, and he nods his head, like he knows what I’m talking about … he’s laughing, he’s laughing.He takes me over and I eat some fish. It’s delicious. But I have to leave now. [She hears the call-back signal.] I thank him … so I go back to the hole in the ice and jump in and come back. It’s very dark now, very dark, and I’m coming back. It feels like a long way, like I’ve dropped through the middle of the earth and … I wind upward … I’m coming through the rocks now. The rocks are slippery and brown and gold. And I’m slipping up through them. I see the frog eggs. The frog eggs are still there. The tadpoles are moving around … and I come up out of the water and sit on the edge of the bank of the stream.14 These were the journeyer’s comments immediately afterward: I feel like I’ve connected with … some old ancestors somewhere. The wolf was beautiful. His eyes. And the fish was delicious, raw fish. I could taste it. I felt like it happened so fast. My body felt very cold, and it felt fear, and it felt hot, too. It felt a lot of extremes of temperature.The things that were especially clear were: the wolf, the eyes, the crystal, the face inside the crystal, then me looking up through ice and … me getting up through it, seeing it’s very bright. It was as though I’d been underneath the ice all that time, but I’d seen a universe … of stars. It was strange because I seemed to pass from the frogs to the wolf very quickly. It was as though I went around the bend of some rocks and there I was! I saw the wolf almost immediately and the stars were there, they were there, it was as though it just opened up and I was out there immediately. The most vivid thing was the yellow eyes of the wolf and the black eyes of the face, the Eskimo face. My body’s shaking. I have chills all over me. Among the noteworthy features of her journey was the fact that she was not just seeing but feeling (heat and cold as well as slippery rocks), hearing (the sound of wolves), and tasting (fish). She also found herself able to breathe underwater. Then she became one with the wolf, a classic shamanic experience characteristic of interaction with one’s guardian spirit or power animal. Further evidence that this animal was a helping animal for her was that it gave her a ride. Her spontaneous merging with the wolf exemplifies how even a beginning, naïve, “civilized” journeyer unexpectedly and readily enters the mythic reality known since ancient times to the tribal shaman. As Eliade observes, “Each time a shaman succeeds in sharing the animal mode of being, he in a manner reestablishes the situation that existed in illo tempore, in mythical times, when the divorce between man and animal had not yet occurred.”15 Evidence of her changed state of consciousness is her observation, “The drums seem to be slowing down. …” In ordinary reality, the drumming on the tape was constant and did not slow down at all. She discovers, as have many shamans the world over, that the quartz crystal can help one see shamanically. She also spontaneously learns something of the hidden cosmology of nonordinary reality, such as the observation that there are stars in the Lower World, and that she can come back up into the Middle World through an opening somewhere else (in this case, an ice hole made by an Eskimo or Inuit), and then return down through it to get back to her original entrance into the Lower World. These things, too, are well known to tribal shamans. Specifically, this last technique—of going down through a pond or waterhole in order to travel though the tunnel parallel to the Middle World and then coming back up to the Middle World through another opening to accomplish distant travel—is a widespread shamanic technique, known in Aboriginal Australia, Native California, and even in survivals of shamanic knowledge in Celtic Scotland. DIVINATION JOURNEYS TO AN ANIMAL A major difference between shamans and most other people is that the shamans have ready and reliable methods for obtaining hidden knowledge to answer questions and solve problems. Therefore, an important task of shamans the world over is to help people obtain answers to questions in their lives. This work is known as “divination” and refers to accessing hidden (“occult”) knowledge that is not normally available to people. Of course, nonordinary reality is not really “hidden” from us; we just have to know how to access it. Shamans may engage in this work for family, friends, strangers, or simply for themselves. Probably the shamans’ most distinctive method for divination is using the journey into nonordinary reality to obtain answers to questions. Here are a few examples of beginners doing this exercise to ask an animal a question. In the first account, the journeyer asks what seems to be a simple question and gets an answer of deeper wisdom than she expected. I traveled down an ant hole I remember, and came into the Lower World fairly quickly. When I emerged, there was a doe standing by the entrance—she was very beautiful. I asked my question, “Where shall I live?” She turned and began to run down a trail. I ran after her but couldn’t keep up. A large buck ran up behind me and swooped me up onto his back. I was in a crowd of deer all running together. They took me into the woods and showed me many things, little of which I remember. The buck said I needed to learn to live like a deer—what I was being shown were different parts of a deer’s life. I do remember a fawn lying in a nest of grass on the ground and also had a feeling that hunters were shooting at us at one point. Finally we ran up a hill. There was a small house on top of the hill, but it seemed hazy. I couldn’t quite see it. I was afraid I was falling asleep and asked the deer to help me to stay awake on the journey. The buck reached up and removed his antlers and put them on my head. I then began to dance a deer dance very energetically. The herd of deer began to run again, but this time I ran with them. My body changed, I was part deer and part human. I had no difficulty running with the deer this time. This felt very freeing and exhilarating.We finally arrived back at a little house on the hill. I could see it clearly now. It was a small round hut covered with hides, possibly a yurt. The buck indicated that I was to go inside, but first he placed the antlers again on my head (I had become fully human again by this time) and put some sort of cloak on my back. The cloak was made of fur, deer hides, and pieces of antler or deer hoof. It felt special, a ceremonial garment of some sort. I was sent into the tent. Inside there was a very old man sitting on the ground. He looked like a shaman. He had a thin face and Oriental features. He, too, was wearing antlers on his head. He was holding a shaman’s drum in one hand and indicated that I was to go through it. I put my head into the tunnel of the drum. It was very dark—I became frightened and pulled back out and left the tent. I went out with the deer for a while (I don’t remember these details), but then returned to the tent. I entered it and this time went willingly into the drum. The tunnel was very dark and narrow. I had difficulty breathing. Finally, my head poked out the other side. It was very beautiful there—like heaven. There was a lake with willow trees around it and exquisitely dressed, smiling people walking in groups by the lake. I tried to leave the tunnel to explore this new world but found that the shaman had tied a rope around my waist to keep me from going too far, or to be sure I would come back. I went back through the tunnel and when I emerged, I saw that there was another string around my waist— attached to the drum—this one made of gold. The shaman told me that it was to allow me to always return to this other world. I went back out to the deer. They took me several places and showed me things. (I was getting very hazy here and remember few details of this.) I kept asking them where I was to live, but they wouldn’t answer. At one point they showed me what looked like a factory at a great distance, with smokestacks—very dirty. The buck told me that I had to clean that up first. I was getting depressed. An eagle flew along and picked me up by my scalp. We flew and flew over many sorts of landscapes. I asked if he was going to show me my home. He said it was all my home. Then the drum called me back.16 Her journey involved the answer to her question as well as other teachings. First, a female deer led her and then a male deer carried and instructed her. Since they both helped, it may have been a teaching, and the animal that helped her may not have been “just” a male or female deer, but Deer. Future journeys can clarify this for her. Being told to live like a deer, and being shown how they were threatened, may well have been a spiritual ecological message about her home, as with the “very dirty” factory. She was initiated into becoming one with the animal (in this case, the deer), learned to do the deer dance, and was given a deer costume, complete with antler headdress, similar to what shamans in Siberia and Mongolia sometimes wear (although she did not know this). She was aware it was a ceremonial garment. Indeed, when one is given such a costume in a journey it usually is a message to make a replica of it in ordinary reality for one’s shamanic work, thereby honoring the spirits that conferred it. Then she was ushered into the shaman’s hut (he had a drum and was also wearing antlers). He taught her how to travel through the drum as a method of journeying. The experience was so real that she experienced difficulty in breathing in the tunnel. She emerged into what seemed like heaven and wanted to go on. She could not go on, however, because the spirit shaman had tied a cord around her waist. Amazingly, this is precisely the technique used in Siberian tribes to be sure the shaman returns from journeys, and this detail was not known to her previously. Here, then, is a good example of how very specific and ancient shamanic techniques are taught again and again to us in nonordinary reality regardless of our cultural background. Since she was shown this method, presumably she was being instructed to use the cord when venturing through the drum to go to that “heaven.” Everything that was shown or given to her can be construed as an answer to her question, “Where shall I live?” She shall live in union with the deer; she shall live in the spirit shaman’s hut; she shall live through the drum; she shall live in the heaven beyond the drum; she shall live in many places (“many landscapes”); she shall live near a dirty factory. Her home is everywhere, as the eagle told her at the end of the journey. This is truly a shaman’s perspective on the meaning of “home” and where the shaman lives. The next journeyer’s question was: “How can I transform my fear of power?” The account is given via simultaneous narration (see this page): I am running into the cave. I come to the first ladder and I run down it a step at a time. I take one step to the side. I run down the next ladder. I reach the bottom. I run into the darkness. I see the pool in front of me, hold my nose, and jump feet first into the pool. I am falling, tumbling, falling. Falling, rolling, tumbling.I land feet first on the ledge of the Lower World. The grizzly bear is there to greet me. I ask the grizzly, “How can I transform my fear of power?” He grabs me with his paw and jumps off the cliff. I am close to his chest. We are rolling over and tumbling into the canyon. We are falling free. Rolling and tumbling into the canyon. We land in a meadow. The grizzly lets go of me and starts walking through the meadow. He leads me into a pool of quicksand. He has his paw in my hand. I’m afraid. We are up to our necks in quicksand. The sand oozes in over our heads. Everything is dark. I can only feel the power of the grizzly. I grip his paw with both hands. Everything is so close. My heart is beating loudly. The grizzly begins to pull his paw away, but I hang on tightly. I say, “No, don’t, don’t let go.”But he takes the paw away, and I’m pressed on all sides by this quicksand. Now I understand: I can stay here as long as I want to. I don’t like it here anymore. I fight my way to the surface and back into the pond. I am in deep water. I see the grizzly on the shore; he’s holding his stomach and laughing loudly. “What are you trying to tell me?” I call. He replies that I can be afraid just as long as I want; I can be closed in just as long as I enjoy it; that when I’m tired of that stance I can break free in the same way I came out of the quicksand. I am moving toward the grizzly. He’s finished laughing, but he’s still smiling.He puts me under his paw again. He’s running on three legs. We come to the edge of a cliff. He stops quickly and throws me over. I can hear him laughing wildly. I’m falling, falling, falling, falling. The colors are changing. I am alone. But I don’t mind being alone. I’m free-falling. The air is clean. Slightly cool. I’m falling into a cloud. It’s still warm. I’m resting on this cloud. I see a speck in the sky. It’s getting bigger. It’s the grizzly. He’s rolled tightly into a ball. He lands right on my middle, laughing wildly, and takes me by the hand. We fly off toward the horizon. I ask the grizzly where we are going. He says, “We are going to another level of fear.” I’m not too sure I want to go to another level of fear. He says, “You asked; don’t give up now.” The colors are changing. He now has me clasped to his middle. We are rolling in a ball. We land on the edge of a cliff. We are dancing down a fiery cliff. We are being consumed by the flames. X and his friends are here. The grizzly and I are being burned up. We are both skeletons, but the bones do not burn. I notice that the grizzly is not laughing now. [She laughs.] I think it’s funny. He says, “You frequently laugh when you are really afraid. Laughter for you is both a medicine and a shield. Do not tempt me to penetrate this shield unless you are ready.” The flames have subsided. I feel cold. My bones are cold. There is a field of bones. My bones and the grizzly’s bones are running hand in hand over this red sunset-colored desert of bones. Grizzly tells me that from this point on I am not to ignore my fears. He says that part of my fears are buried in the bones of my ancestors. He gives my bones a shovel and tells me to dig. His bones sit nearby in an attitude of watching. I begin shoveling faster, faster, faster. The amount of dirt flying out of this hole is exhilarating. Shoveling, shoveling dirt. Deeper, deeper. I look up from the bottom of this hole. Grizzly is leaning over watching me. He shouts, “Deeper.” I can’t throw the dirt out of the hole anymore, so I begin to burrow. I take this form of a mole, burrowing deeper, deeper, deeper into the heart of the earth mother. At the end of the hole I find a red, beating heart. The heart is beating rhythmically. I lie face down on the heart. As I listen, the heartbeat grows stronger, faster. I ask the heart, “How can I transform my fear of power?” I ask the heart to help me. It folds in on top of me. I am lying in the heart of the heart. I am lying enfolded in the heart of the heart. I am being flushed from one vein in the heart. I have a very emotional feeling as I am being pushed out of this heart, beat by beat, into a vein. Beat by beat. Down into the very foot of my understanding. I am still in the vein of my foot. I am in the joint of my big toe. I ask the bone of my big toe if it thinks I will be able to find my way back, for I am far away. The bone of my big toe says, “You are farther away than you think. The bones of your ancestors are in your bones. The release from fear that you seek is supported by the bones of your ancestors and by the bones of your bones. Beyond a certain useful alerting, fear is a waste of a precious, precious energy. The supply of power and of energy being furnished you for your life’s purpose is beyond your comprehension. “The very fact that you are afraid of abuse and that you ask frequently that your motives be checked, that you turn it all over to the great spirit, our lord, the Sun, the central Sun, to that and that which may not be said, means that if you are far off track in your request, you will be aligned.“Have no fear. It is easy to say, ‘Have no fear.’ It is something else to put it into practice. Your headaches are frequently caused by blocking incoming power and information. I am finished with you now. Return.” I thank the bone in my toe. But I don’t feel like returning. Maybe I’ll go back up to the heart. I have my hands over my head. I’m going up the vein from my toe, back to the heart, that I now realize is my heart. I ask the heart if it has any other information for me regarding the transformation of my fear of power. The bear says, “You restrict your own power with your fear. If you are ready to accept the responsibility of additional power, the power is available to you.”I feel twitching in the back of my neck. I am ready to return from this journey. The heart says that I can go back through the hole that I came from. I’m slowly coming back. I can now look up and see the bones of the grizzly watching me. I realize that part of the answer in this journey is that I can experience my fear as long as I want to. I now hear drumming for the return. The grizzly grabs me by his hand of bones. We run back across the field of bones and up onto the cliff. We roll and roll and roll. We are now flying over the terrain to the edge of the first cliff. As we stand on the edge of the cliff, I thank the grizzly for his help. I enter the tunnel. I come back up through the pond, up the first ladder, up the second ladder, into the mouth of the cave, back into my body. This journey is over.17 The above journey has a number of classic shamanic aspects. As soon as the journeyer asks the grizzly bear the question, it immediately starts answering by putting the person through a number of fearful experiences: jumping off cliffs, drowning in quicksand, being thrown off a cliff, and being burned down to the bones in fire. The journeyer is reduced to a skeleton, much as one finds in descriptions by Siberian or Inuit shamans of their dismemberments (see Chapter 11). The journeyer discovers that he not only survives all these experiences, he learns answers to his question from them. He also finds that the grizzly is there to help him and even to give him direct mental– verbal answers. The journeyer realizes that not only is the animal answering his question, but the heart and the toe bone also respond. Since they are helping him in nonordinary reality, it signifies that they are helping spirits, or spirit helpers for him. He can return to them in the future for additional assistance. The journeyer is also beginning to discover for himself, as shamans everywhere know, that everything, even a bone, is alive and able to converse with the shaman. Finally, the journeyer does a conscientious job of retracing his route when it is time to return. This is part of the discipline of shamanic journeying. LEARNING TO UNDERSTAND THE POWER ANIMALS’ ANSWERS As discussed earlier, the animal may reply to a question directly by thoughts or words. Such replies are usually relatively unambiguous. Many other times, though, the animal may answer by shaking or nodding its head, or using other movements. With regard to the head or body-movement type of answer, usually the first thing the animal does is the essence of the answer. Often a person new to divination journeying fails to understand that the animal has replied through head or body movement, and he or she journeys onward without realizing that the answer has already been given. For example, one man new to divination journeying met a horse in the Lower World and asked the horse his question, which called for a “yes” or “no” type of answer. The animal pawed the ground two times with his right front hoof. The neophyte journeyer was very disappointed, assuming that he had not been given an answer, and he continued journeying.The horse disappeared and then returned, this time richly caparisoned as a circus horse with a plumed headdress. It pranced around. The journeyer still did not know what to make of it and went on. The horse disappeared and reappeared another time, now doing somersaults and other fancy tricks. There was still no meaning for the journeyer. So when the journey was over, he told me he had not received an answer to his question and was disappointed. I shared with him a possibility that was consistent with my knowledge: the maxim that the first thing the animal says or does is commonly the answer, whether or not the journeyer understands it. Since he did not understand that the horse had answered by pawing the ground, the horse then undertook to educate him by showing it was a circus horse. When he still did not understand, then the animal showed him it was a trick horse. Although this journeyer still did not understand, other journeyers in the same situation might have known that trick circus horses give answers to questions by pawing the ground with a front hoof. The journeyer presumably was being taught that he had to learn the body language or code of this animal and then would be able to understand the answers. Many persons perceive immediately the metaphoric meaning of nonordinary animals’ body language, even without training in shamanism. One famous case is that of the renowned mid-nineteenth.century German scientist Friedrich Kekulé von Stradonitz, who is celebrated for his discovery of the structure of the benzene molecule, a concept that paved the way for many of the modern advances in organic chemistry. Kekulé had long struggled without success to figure out the benzene molecular structure, a problem that had chemists baffled at that time. One account of his discovery (there are many versions, but they all tend to be visionary) was that he was alone at home one night in 1859 when he saw in the darkness a serpent holding its tail in its mouth, forming a circle. He immediately recognized that the animal was using body language to communicate the answer that had escaped him up to that time: that the structure was a circle or ring. As a result of his visionary experience, Kekulé in 1865 published his theory of the benzene ring. Finally in 1988 scientists of the IBM Almaden Research Center in California confirmed his theory when a special microscope made the benzene ring visible for the first time. A fine treatise on scientific discovery, The Art of Scientific Investigation, by the British pathologist William Beveridge,18 cites numerous cases from the history of science where now-famous investigators struggled to solve a problem without success for weeks, months, and years, unable to obtain the hidden knowledge that would provide the answer they sought.Then, giving up on solving the problem (at least temporarily), the researcher, relaxed in a carriage, streetcar, railroad train, or other conducive environment, entered a different state of consciousness and saw or otherwise retrieved the revolutionary solution to the problem. It is perhaps no accident that a carriage, streetcar, and railroad train all produce a monotonous percussion sound and thus would facilitate a trance-like state of consciousness somewhat analogous to that effected with the help of the shaman’s drum. FROM SYMBOL TO MEANING Since we have discussed one journey that exemplified the need to learn the animal’s body language, let us now briefly introduce the shamanic perspective on deciphering the symbolic information that power animals often use to provide answers. There is no “official” meaning of the visual symbols encountered by shamans in their journeys. Each shaman and shamanic journeyer discovers these meanings for himself or herself. No one is better qualified to know the meaning of the symbol than the journeyer. This does not imply that the meaning will be understood immediately; but it does mean that each answer is perfectly suited for the journeyer. The spirits know everything about the journeyer and take it all into account in their communications and advice. If the journeyer is a Freudian psychoanalyst, the spirits will be aware of that and communicate appropriately using the symbolic framework that the person understands. If the journeyer is an Amazonian Indian shaman, the spirits will communicate in terms of the symbology that that person understands. Let us suppose that the psychoanalyst and the Amazon shaman are both receiving the same advice for their lives. In order for them to be told symbolically to do the same thing, they must be told in different ways, since each has a different cultural history and environment. By the same token, even persons who belong to the same culture, such as modern Western “civilization,” will be shown somewhat different symbology in their journeys in order to be given the same answer, because each journeyer has his or her own personal history and understanding of symbols. In other words, the same images are likely to mean different things to different people, especially people of distinctly foreign cultures. For example, if an unmissionized Australian aboriginal is shown the Virgin Mary as a Neapolitan would see her, much like a robed statue in a church, the image would not mean the same thing that it does to the Italian Catholic. For the Australian aboriginal to see the same thing in terms of its meaning, it would have to appear at least somewhat different. Perhaps it would be an ancestral-looking naked elderly aboriginal woman with tousled hair. I do not really know. Shamans see with the heart, not just the mind, which means that for something to be the same for two people in nonordinary reality, it must be the same in the heart, whatever the external appearances. Thus, in nonordinary reality things often must look different to different persons in order to mean the same thing. The images we receive from the power animals, and in nonordinary reality in general, are perfect for each one of us. This is the perfection of direct spiritual experience, a perfection that does not normally characterize ordinary reality.How does the shaman know what an image represents? The answer is simple—the shaman goes on a journey and asks the image. This is one of the many strengths of the journey approach to hidden knowledge: you can work on any puzzle in a journey and, if necessary, in subsequent journeys, until satisfied that you have received an adequate answer. Sometimes a power animal will give a direct answer telepathically, or in words, or with body language. On the other hand, the power animal may just turn around and run off, leading or carrying the person on a journey to show the answer to the question. As the journeyer is shown each vista or thing, she or he should try to consider how it may be a part of the answer that is sought. LITERAL VERSUS SYMBOLIC ANSWERS Sometimes the visual and verbal communications are to be taken quite literally, rather than symbolically. One can only learn from practice how to distinguish the two. With such practice, one discovers that sometimes even an “outlandish” journey answer should be taken quite literally, or at least examined as a possible literal communication before jumping to the conclusion that it must be a symbolic or metaphorical answer. In one of my workshops in Europe, for example, a woman reported that in reply to her question, her power animal told her to take a streetcar to a certain suburb in ten minutes. She asked me, “What does it mean?” I had to reply, “Since you finished your journey five minutes ago, it means that you have five minutes remaining.” She immediately left. I was not being facetious. As she had no symbolic interpretation of the message, and time was too short to take another journey to get additional clarification, the shamanic thing to do was to honor the power animal and immediately take the action advised. She dashed off to her destiny. I do not know what the consequences of her action were, but I feel confident that by taking that streetcar she got her answer. 7 Shamanic Ascension: History, Folklore, and Knowledge A long way to go a long way to climb a long way to go to the sky Grizzly Bearrisinghigh behind the clouds pawtracksmake a circle in the sky a long way to go a long way to climb a long way to go to the sky fire beneath this house many firesthese fires my ancestors my people a long way to go a long way to climb a long way to go to the sky dead uncles dead shamans they hand me two rattles they give me this song I’m singing a long way to go a long way to climb a long way to go to the sky —Shaman’s song from the Tsimshian people of the Northwest Coast of North America1 The Foundation’s work to bring knowledge of shamanism and shamanic healing back to the West has been one of its major educational tasks, since shamanism essentially disappeared from Europe and the West during the last two millennia. How did that happen? Up to about two thousand years ago most northern and central Europeans lived in ways somewhat similar to those of many North American Indian peoples prior to Columbus. They subsisted through hunting, gathering, fishing, and, in most places, agriculture, living with their own spirits and shamans. Then they were invaded and conquered by outsiders in the name of civilization, specifically Mediterranean, or Roman, civilization. Julius Caesar’s legions accelerated the imposition of the religion of Rome on the peoples conquered and enslaved. In the classic manner of “civilized” conquest, the Romans imposed not only their centralized government on the vanquished but their official church-state religion too. The later conversion of Rome to a “Christian empire” led to a development obviously not advocated by Jesus Christ when he said, “Render unto Caesar that which is Caesar’s, and render unto God that which is God’s.” The Christian state-church now made it possible, through taxation, to render to Caesar and God simultaneously. This practice was continued into the twentieth century by the imperial church-states of Central and Eastern Europe, Caesar being transliterated as “Kaiser” and “Czar.” What Caesar’s legions did not accomplish was completed by the “Holy Roman Empire” by the end of the seventeenth century, with not-so-holy military and political alliances aimed at converting all the natives of Europe to the one true faith, regardless of the bloodshed required. Stigmatized and persecuted as “witches,” “wizards,” and “sorcerers,” shamans were virtually exterminated in Europe south of the Arctic Circle by the “Holy” Inquisition of the Church and by militant Protestant groups.In the far north of Europe, above the Circle, where the influence of Church and State was slower to impact native life, some of the more remote Sami or Saami (formerly “Lapp”) people tried to keep their classic shamanism alive despite persecution that was often violent, the shamans being called “witches,” as I pointed out in Hallucinogens and Shamanism.2 To escape authorities, some Sami shamans hid their drums in remote locations and used them in secret. When discovered, the shamans were seriously punished, even killed, and their drums confiscated or destroyed. Some of these finally ended up in museum collections. To this day they are often called “witches’ drums” by Sami converted to Christianity or by outsiders, lingering evidence of the not.too-distant days of persecution. Among traditional Sami themselves, the instrument is called “the magic drum.” The Sami were famous in the past for using their magic drums to journey to other worlds, and for painting the hide heads of the drums with maps showing the realms to which they traveled. The painted Sami drums that survive in museum collections typically show the near.universal three worlds of the shaman (Upper, Lower, and Middle) and the types of spirits and deities that the Sami encountered in each (see Plate 6).3 Hearing that the shaman’s drum had finally disappeared among the Sami, I wanted to see for myself. In the early 1980s I twice went north of the Arctic Circle in Finland, Sweden, and Norway.4 There I learned that the past was not entirely the past. At that time in “liberal” Scandinavia, government-supported missionaries still prohibited the use of the shaman’s drum among the Sami people. This became evident firsthand in northern Sweden in 1983, when I, my wife Sandra, and some Sami friends visited a few rural Sami households. I carried my drum in a case. A Lutheran priest followed us from house to house and questioned the people after we left to find out what we were doing with our drum. I found similar Episcopalian missionary pressure a few years later among the inland Inuit in Canada, forcing the people to abandon the shaman’s drum. As had been the situation for centuries elsewhere, the noise of the drum for journeying made shamans an easy target for identification and retribution. The Sami shamanism of the twentieth century was a shamanism decimated by history. While the few remaining shamans continued to make special offerings on mountaintops, nowhere could I find the shamans using drums to journey. A few Sami still secretly made and used drums, but apparently only for shamanic divination, lightly tapping on the drum’s painted head to ask questions answered by the movement of a small bone object on the surface.5 Wishing to learn if anything remained of shamanic healing methods among the Sami, and having a personal health problem at that time, I was able to make an appointment with the famous Sami healer, the late Mikhail (“Miracle Fox”) Gaup, at his home near Alta in northernmost Norway. When Heimo Lappalainen and I arrived at the appointed time, the house was dark and appeared empty. Heimo knocked on the door several times. No answer. We waited more than half an hour. Finally he went back to the door and pushed on it. The heavy wooden door slowly opened, making a creaking sound like something from a horror film. There was nothing before us except a somewhat dark and apparently unused room. I found another door inside, which I started to open. Suddenly I was shocked by someone who came from behind and threw me to the floor of the next room. Dazed, I looked up to find a huge young man towering over me who shouted loudly in a language I could not understand. He then left me on the floor and exited the room in another direction. Heimo helped me off the floor and explained what the young man had shouted, more as a challenge than a question: “Do you believe in the power of the Sun?” This was one of those high points in anthropological fieldwork. Not only had I learned, dramatically, that Sun worship survived in this remote part of the European continent, but so did an ancient Sami shamanic practice of shocking the patient prior to doing the healing. The young man was clearly Miracle Fox’s assistant. I replied positively to his question. Indeed, who could question the power of the Sun? Now I had real evidence that some shamanism was still alive in Europe!6 I will not share the healing details, but it was done the way Miracle Fox often did it, away from any possible witnesses, behind the closed door of the bathroom! I do need to mention that he did not use the drum journey nor even a drum. From working with Mikhail on a later visit, I discovered that although he knew how to tap the drum lightly for divination, he apparently did not know about journeying with it. In fact, the last case I could find of traditional Sami use of a drum for journeying was reported in the early 1930s in northern Finland near Lake Inari. I say “traditional” because drum journeying is now slowly starting to return there, partly because of help from the Foundation for Shamanic Studies and my former students, one of them a Sami. Christianity has not been alone in attempting to eradicate shamanism. Ironically, “godless” Communism in the former Soviet Union also found shamanism to be a threat in northern Eurasia, including those Sami dwelling within Russia. The Soviets could not afford to have shamans constantly in contact with the spirits when, according to Marxism-Leninism, spirits could not possibly exist. Furthermore, the prestige and influence of the shamans was seen as a threat to the authority of the local Communist officials.7 Among the Amur River peoples of southeastern Siberia and their indigenous neighbors just across the border in northernmost China, for example, the mere possession of a shaman’s drum could result in on-the-spot execution or life imprisonment by the Soviets, or by the Chinese Communists during the Cultural Revolution.8 Unknown hundreds, possibly thousands, of native Siberians were killed or died in labor camps because of their shamanic “heresies.” The persecution of shamans is historically known for many other major civilizations, including those of China, Mongolia, and the Islamic world. For example, when Islam penetrated parts of Central Asia centuries ago, local claims of ascension experiences were deemed heretical. Although some shamanic practitioners of a sort still exist in Uzbekistan, for example, they assimilated themselves into Islam as imams and no longer journeyed to other worlds.9 This seems only prudent. Similarly, in Mongolia shamans were once executed in the name of Buddhism, and in China they were persecuted during various centuries by Confucians as well as Buddhists. The worldwide persecution of shamans, while not compassionate, was politically logical, for shamanism by its very nature is a threat to the authority of those who establish and control state religions, or who consider religions of any type a threat to their political power. Persons practicing shamanic ascension, for example, often get spiritual instruction directly through the same kinds of experiences and from the same realms as the most exalted founding visionaries of state religions, as we shall see later. This is inherently subversive. After all, if common people can be bearers of divine revelation, this interferes with the creation and maintenance of monopolistic religions based primarily upon the reported words and miracles of their founders.10 It is an ironic tragedy that the once-shamanic Europeans, after being converted to Christianity, commonly subjected other indigenous peoples of the world to the same conversion processes that their own cultures had once experienced under the Romans. This Earthwide spiritual destruction took longer to reach some regions than others. While knowledge of shamanic ascension and other journeys virtually disappeared from Europe11 until recent work began to restore its practice there, it survived longer in remote places on other continents, where some indigenous shamans still journeyed and practiced shamanic ascension, the topic to which we now turn. ASCENSION DEPARTURE SITES, AND ECHOES IN WESTERN FOLKLORE As I have long pointed out to students, relics of the once-widespread indigenous knowledge of shamanism suggest that some contemporary Western folktales and rituals may have their genesis in ancient European knowledge of shamanic ascension and cosmology. For example, many tales include special or magical spots in nature or human structures that are used in ways parallel to shamanic journey practices. In shamanic ascension, an important step is the selection of a “take-off” site or departure place. A few examples are presented below. This knowledge was shared by the Foundation in courses with students, the “Westerners,” before they undertook ascensions themselves. SMOKE HOLES AND CHIMNEYS Some indigenous shamans in Siberia and northern North America utilized as a focal point the smoke from the fires kept in the center of their houses. They closed or covered their eyes, visualized the smoke, and ascended through the smoke hole in the roof. In the South American tropical forest, the Warao shamans often ascended to the Upper World on the smoke of their two-foot-long sacred cigars.12 Among the Monguor people of China, a shaman can rise on the smoke of burning incense, which is like a “living road to heaven.”13 Shamanic ascension through a dwelling’s smoke hole probably was practiced in ancient Europe also, surviving into the Middle Ages and early Renaissance as the “witch’s” flight, as I have indicated elsewhere.14 Gradually, however, the smoke hole was largely replaced by the fireplace with a flue, chimneys having come to England in the thirteenth century. Thus the first woodcuts and paintings of European shamans (called “witches”) typically show them going up through chimneys.15 The lingering British folk beliefs about the magical powers of chimney sweeps are probably not unrelated. Ascending to the Upper World, the Siberian Chukchee shamans visited the Polar Star, called the “Upper Being” or even “Creator.”16 As Bogoras reports, the Polar Star gives refuge to visitors “oppressed by their foes in their earthly life” and “then sends them back with large presents and provisions.”17 The presents were presumably brought back on a nonordinary sled drawn by a reindeer, a classic way for Siberian shamans to journey in nonordinary reality.18 Some writers have argued that such reputed behavior as going up and down chimneys and flying through the air in a reindeer-drawn sled was the pure invention of New Yorker Clement Moore, who in 1823 wrote the children’s favorite “A Visit from St. Nicholas” (“ ’Twas the night before Christmas …”). Its roots, however, seem to be much deeper, in the shamanic past, as I have long suggested to my students. Saint Nicholas was a bishop who lived in Turkey during the fourth century and was famed for making magical journeys through the air to such places as Italy. Not surprisingly, at one point in his life he was persecuted and tortured by the Church. That he lived in Turkey is not surprising, since Turkic-speaking peoples were famous for their practice of shamanism, which they have maintained continually in Central Asia. Perhaps because of his presumed ability to fly across seas to distant lands and return successfully, Saint Nicholas became the patron saint of Mediterranean and other European sailors, including the Dutch voyagers who founded New Amsterdam (later to be known as New York City) in the early seventeenth century. The Dutch made him the patron saint of New Amsterdam19 and also brought from Holland the tradition of Saint Nicholas delivering gifts to homes during the Christmas season. When the English seized New Amsterdam and renamed it New York, their culture mixed with that of the Dutch, and their descendants adopted the Dutch folk tradition of Saint Nicholas’s Christmas visits. They also adopted the medieval Dutch name for Saint Nicholas, Sinterklaas, a term that is still used in Holland. The “r” sound in Sinterklaas softened and disappeared, as it often does in New York–style English, with the result that throughout the United States today we speak of “Santa Claus.” The various clues given above suggest that our present-day Santa Claus may have his ultimate origin in Siberian shamanism, possibly mediated by the Sami people. POLES AND TREES AS DEPARTURE SITES Sacred trees, or poles made from them, can serve as ladders to start an ascent from the Middle World. In Siberia, the home of the word “shaman,” such a tree is commonly a birch or larch. It may stand in a sacred grove deep in the forest or be a post with notched steps to make a ladder that sticks up through the smoke hole of a yurt or tepee.20 A post with notched steps is likewise used by the Mapuche shamans in southern South America to start their ascents, which (like the Siberians) they make with the aid of drumming.21 (See Plate 10.) Similarly, California Indian shamans sometimes visualized climbing the center post of their ceremonial “round house” in a way reminiscent of using trees for ascension purposes in Asia.22 The center post is the most sacred part of these houses, partly because it connects this Middle World with the Upper and Lower ones. Similarly, in Siberia the saplings sticking up from the smoke holes in shamans’ yurts and tepees represent the World Tree or World Pillar connecting the worlds.23 The concept that the individual shaman’s tree or post is the World Tree or World Pillar is found in many indigenous societies, an idea related to the shaman’s departure place being the Center of the World, or Universe.24 In many shamanic cultures of Siberia, the North Star is commonly seen as the top of a pole or World Pillar, since all the other stars rotate around it. The North Star’s alternate name as the Polar Star both in northern Europe and Siberia reflects these origins, and our use of the term “North Pole” is directly related. Among the Buryat of Siberia, the stars were viewed as a slowly moving herd of horses tethered to this North Pole.25 Similarly, the pre.Christian Germans and Scandinavians spoke of the World Tree or World Pillar, Yggdrasil, to which was tied the god Odin’s horse. Odin’s horse was probably the constellation we now know popularly as the Little Dipper, with the handle of the dipper his horse’s tether, since the last star in it is the Polar Star, or the top of the World Pillar or Pole. Like the giant catahua (ceiba) tree among the Conibo, Yggdrasil not only stretched into the Upper World, but its roots also went down into the Lower World.26 It seems very likely that the Scandinavian myth of Yggdrasil descends from shamanism, since European shamanism survived the longest in northern Scandinavia compared to its existence farther south, although the Sami shamans in the north were also persecuted as witches.27 The Anglo-German maypole, used in celebrating the warming influence of the spring sun, may be part of this same tradition, with the dancers “tethered” to the top of the pole as they circle around it, much like the stars circling around the North Pole. Occasionally the maypole is still climbed in Europe, much in the way Siberian and some South American indigenous shamans sometimes climbed ladder-like poles or trees to start their ascents to the Upper World.28 Today in Germanic countries, the maypole may have three horizontal rings placed equidistant along its length, and the motif of three rings on a pole also survives in Mongolia, where they represent the Upper, Middle, and Lower Worlds on the handheld shaman’s staff.29 The evergreen winter solstice tree (the “Christmas tree”) came to America reportedly from Germany, which shares the World Tree tradition with Scandinavia. It seems like a miniature reminder of Yggdrasil, the “always green” World Tree symbolized in pre-Christian Sweden by a huge evergreen tree near the pagan temple in Uppsala.30 The star traditionally placed atop the Christmas evergreen tree echoes the Polar Star, now reincarnated as the Star of Bethlehem. The lights (formerly candles) on the branches, circling the tree, remind one of the stars circling the North Pole. Nineteenth-century Christmas trees had representations of angels hanging from their boughs, not unlike how the Siberian Evenki (Tungus) shamans’ spirit helpers and guardians were thought to sit on the boughs of small trees that shamans cut and erected in their dwellings to represent the World Tree.31 The contemporary American Christmas celebration of December 25th is only a few days removed from the (northern hemisphere’s) winter solstice date and seems to retain shamanistic elements. It is partially a survival of solar traditions, such as keeping a Yule fire burning to encourage the Sun to strengthen its light.32 Perhaps unconscious honoring of the sun persists not only in Sami shamanism, as previously noted, but also unconsciously in Germany today, where large evergreen trees may be cut and erected outdoors on a mountaintop the evening of a saint’s day conveniently close to the summer solstice date. Wood is stacked against the upright tree to make a pyre whose flames can be seen on other mountain crests where similar fires burn. Traditionally, families gathered near the fires for feasting, while their children frolicked in the gentle Midsummer’s Eve as the sparks of the bonfires rose up into the night sky.33 Such summer solstice bonfires on mountains in Germany were reported in pre-Christian times by the Romans. A few modern German summer solstice participants that I interviewed seemed unable to provide a conscious explanation for the bonfires built today around evergreen trees on mountain summits. SUMMITS OF MOUNTAINS Mountaintops were often used as shamans’ departure points, even on isolated islands in the Pacific, as among the Samoans.34 Much as a specific arboreal departure site for shamans could become for them the World Tree, a particular mountaintop could become in the shaman’s consciousness the Cosmic Mountain. The Cosmic Mountain was well known in the shamanic cultures of Siberia and Mongolia.35 Just as the World Tree became known as Yggdrasil in the myths of northern Europe, so did the World Mountain or Cosmic Mountain become standardized in the mythology of India and Tibet as “Mount Meru.” In mythic times, according to the Sanskrit epic The Mahabharata, Mount Meru was climbed through the “power of yoga” by the spiritual master Narada.36 His ascension appears analogous to shamanic ascent, as I found in comparing practices with some yogis when in India. Beyond this Cosmic Mountain, it was said, lay Shambhala, a mythic land of perfection. Many have since searched without success in ordinary reality for Mount Meru, hoping to reach Shambhala through various earthly expeditions.37 However, as shamans know, the true lands of perfection lie beyond the Middle World and beyond ordinary reality. SUN RAYS AND THE MILKY WAY In northeastern Siberia, Chukchee shamans wishing to ascend to the Upper World focused on recalling a place where they had seen the rays of the setting sun filtering down through the clouds. The sunbeams then were used as an inclined path to start off for the Upper World.38 In an analogous manner, the Cubeo of the Upper Amazon climbed up the Milky Way from the night horizon.39 WHIRLWINDS, TORNADOES, AND WATERSPOUTS Another way to ascend to the Upper World was in a whirlwind, tornado, or waterspout. In the shamanistic western North American Indian Ghost Dance of 1890, the song of an Arapaho participant in what probably is now Kansas reflects this kind of experience. In this song of his ascension, he combined with an eagle spirit while spiraling upward in a whirlwind or tornado: I circle around I circle around The boundaries of the earth, The boundaries of the earth Wearing the long wing feathers as I fly, Wearing the long wing feathers as I fly.40 A RAINBOW Among the Chukchee of Siberia, a rainbow remembered by a shaman41 is one of the classic departure points for the Upper World.42 In some shamanic cultures this portal is known as the “rainbow bridge” or the “rainbow road.”43 Similarly, the seven bands of color in the rainbow are seen as seven steps to be climbed. For the Australian aboriginal peoples, the ideal rainbow was one that a shaman had seen rising up from a waterhole, since the same site could be used to go down to the Lower World and up on the rainbow to the Upper World. The Australian shamans sometimes climbed up a rainbow as if it were a rope.44 8 Drumming over the Rainbow: Westerners Ascend to the Upper World I have [risen] from the earth to the sky. I am walking over the rainbow. —Sacred song of a sky shaman in Tuva1 Between two worlds I travel And I understand more clearly those who have gone. —Bayar Dugarov, Buryat shaman poet2 “Sky shamans” in Tuva and some other parts of Siberia specialize in working with the Upper World. Among the Tuvans they are considered to be the highest of shamans, literally and metaphorically. They use no mind-altering substances, relying solely on drumming.3 In contemporary western Canada, the Beaver River Athapaskan people likewise use only drums to ascend “the trail to heaven,”4 as do Mapuche shamans in Chile when ascending thier ladders.5 ASCENSION PREPARATION After receiving ascension instructions, including descriptions of the kinds of departure sites used by indigenous shamans, the Westerners chose their own ways of starting their ascents. Incidentally, a rainbow was one of the several most popular ways to start, both for them and for indigenous sky shamans. As a first assignment, many were given the mission to explore and then report what they found. Having a mission or purpose in advance is one of the defining differences between shamanic journeys and “trips.” No information was given about what to expect in the Upper World, other than that it had layers or levels. No verbal guidance was given during the ascensions (it could not have been heard anyway over the sound of drumming). Participants were told simply how to get there, not what to find. Although students often expressed curiosity concerning the nature of the Upper World, they were advised that they would have to find out about it for themselves. The methods used were essentially the same as those described in Appendix A, “Ascending to the Upper World to Compare Experiences.”Consistent with the principles and practices of core shamanism, ascension preparation was kept to an essential minimum so that students, “the Westerners,” would not be conditioned regarding what to expect. For example, the words “heaven,” “heavens,” or “heavenly” were never mentioned nor even implied in the information given beforehand, with only the term “Upper World” being employed. Likewise, a possible encounter with deities was never mentioned. The journeys were not “guided meditations,” and the only ordinary.reality sound the students could hear was monotonous drumming. The intention was that the students should have their own autonomous experiences.The drumbeat was similar to that used by indigenous shamans to start their own ascensions and other journeys. However, shamans usually change the drumbeat as they merge with particular spirits who then “take over” the beating of the drum in a more irregular fashion. This was not possible in drumming for a group or making a recording of such drumming for journeying. The drumming was either live or, in a minority of these cases, recorded shamanic journey drumming was used. Both work well.6 As with the Tuvan sky shamans of southern Siberia, the Westerners ascended completely without the use of mind-altering substances. In addition, most of them had never ascended to the Upper World before. They were Americans, Australians, and Canadians, almost all of European descent, along with some Europeans visiting the United States. ARE THESE WESTERNERS’ EXPERIENCES ONLY IMAGINARY? Although indigenous shamans consider their journeys quite real, it is often difficult at first for many Westerners to accept that these ascensions are more than just their imagination. Experienced journeyers usually do not have this problem, having learned, through extensively practicing the technique, the existence of another reality. Most of the ascension reports in this chapter are those of first-timers. Are such experiences only imaginary? This is a question that readers ultimately will have to answer for themselves. To do that successfully, I recommend reading the information in Appendices A and C. For evidence that shamanic ascensions are more than imagination, I have already shared with you in Chapter 2 a few of the “miracles” of the reality of spirits. Here is another case, one that involved an eminent anthropologist, Edith Turner, who attended one of my workshops. About her first experience she wrote: … it happened that in July 1987, before I went to Alaska … I attended Michael Harner’s shaman workshop in Virginia. He was teaching workshop participants how to make a shaman journey while lying down in darkness. We were to visualize a climb upward, up a tree, or mountain, or building, or the like. After a first stage of visualization, the experience itself was liable to take over, and we would meet a “teacher” of some kind. We lay down and Michael beat his drum steadily. I visualized my ascent and found myself out on a bank of cloud. “How corny,” I said. A figure appeared on my left, a monk in a cowl, and again I thought, “How corny, like a cartoon.” … I went up a little more and came to an entire wall of electronic appliances, VCRs, CD sets, stereos, radios, and a large TV screen toward the right. Pictured in the screen was something dark red, filling the whole rectangle. It looked like a maze of internal organs sideways on, elongated, and definitely unlike human internal organs. Why were they there? What was that all about? … When the drumming changed I went down the way I had come and eventually remembered that I was lying on the floor. The other participants were sitting up around me. We told our experiences to Harner; he accepted them but did not analyze them psychologically. Four months later in November, when I was settled in among the Eskimos at Point Hope, Alaska, sitting in Ernest Frankson’s house, Ernest pulled into the room the body of a ringed seal. His wife laid the seal on some cardboard and proceeded to take off the skin. She allowed me to help cut off the blubber. Then she made a slit down the stomach and displayed the internal organs. Wondering, I contemplated them carefully. It was striking to see the dark red parts, liver, spleen, intestines, lungs, heart, and so on, settled together, sliding together with such orderliness and easy movement. Two days later I caught on, as my diary records. Those internal organs were the same organs that I had seen on the shaman TV screen in July.7 Following is the experience of another anthropologist, an Australian, taking a workshop. He ascended to the Upper World for the first time. I enter the fireplace and quickly shoot up the chimney into a lightish grey whirling cloud tunnel. Soon I am aware of my guardian—a pelican with a pink beak.Mounting the pelican’s back, I ride higher with it into the smoke tunnel. In the distance I see a golden mountain rising in the mist … As we draw closer I see that, built on top of the mountain, is a magnificent palace made of golden crystal, radiating lime-yellow light. I am told that this is the palace of the phoenix, and I then see that golden bird surmounting the edifice. It seems to be connected to my own power-hawk.I feel awed and amazed by the beauty of this place, but the regal bird bids me welcome. Then the hawk comes forward and places a piece of golden crystal on my chest. I hold my breath deeply as I receive it, for it is a special gift.The drum is still sounding but soon Michael [beats the signal] to return. However, I am still high in the sky and find it very difficult to reenter the smoke tunnel. When I finally do begin to return, the heavens remain golden, and as I travel down into the tunnel I look up to see saintlike figures rimming the tunnel, farewelling me.8 He subsequently wrote: “This journey was a very awesome one for me. After returning to an awareness of the workshop location and the people around me, I found it very difficult to articulate my thoughts. I seemed lost for words but anxious, nevertheless, to communicate some of the importance that the journey had for me. I felt I had been in a very sacred space.”9 WESTERNERS’ ASCENSION REPORTS Following are examples of experiences of Western students of shamanism when they likewise were asked to visit and explore the Upper World. Some of these experiences have been grouped according to themes, recognizing that there are also many other themes to which I could have called attention. The first ones are grouped according the departure place they all employed, a rainbow. ASCENDING FROM A RAINBOW A WAGON ON A RAINBOW One of the students was a Swedish woman who chose a rainbow as her route to the Upper World. When she arrived at the top of the arc, she was startled to discover an old wooden wagon that she could hear rumbling along it. Nothing was pulling the wagon, and no one was in it. She was puzzled, and when she returned from her journey, which continued beyond the rainbow, she asked me what the old wagon meant, since she had no idea. I told her that I did not know for certain but asked if she had ever heard of Thor’s wagon. She had not. I explained that in ancient Nordic mythology the god Thor was said to go along the rainbow in a wooden wagon, the rumbling sound producing thunder. She was surprised and particularly excited because her own first name was Tora, the female equivalent in Swedish of the name for Thor. As persons pursue this work they accumulate many such micro.miracles, and they come to understand how one can enter a world of gods and goddesses where everything that ever happened is still going on, and where lost sacred knowledge can be regained. The shamanic journeyer discovers that the gods are not dead. OVER THE RAINBOW TO A BEAUTIFUL “MAGICAL PLACE” AND CELESTIAL MUSIC This Westerner chose to climb a rainbow he remembered while listening to a recording of shamanic journey drumming. There was no “ordinary.reality” music of any kind being played in the room where he listened to the drumming. Using the simultaneous-narration method, he recorded his experiences as they happened. (For information on simultaneous narration, see this page.) I’m climbing the rainbow. Below me it is smooth, like silk. I feel a power pulling me up. Below me I see the hills, and a road. I’m climbing up the rainbow. Above me I see clouds. They are white, gray, and fluffy. I reach the top of the rainbow. I step onto a cloud. I’m surprised that it holds my weight. I walk along the clouds, among the clouds. When he went through the cloud layer, he passed the transition zone or “barrier” to the Upper World. This barrier can also manifest in other forms, such as a permeable membrane (as mentioned earlier). The subsequent barriers he later mentions are those between the levels of the Upper World and are usually less substantial. An eagle flies to me. I ask him, “Where am I?” He says, “You are in the Upper World.” I am now in the Upper World flying higher and higher … with great eagle wings. I am soaring higher and higher. I see manbird deities, who fly higher still. Flying on eagle wings, going up through another barrier, I encounter forests, and trees, and nature. It is not as austere. I keep flying higher, higher. I am flying higher and higher. Still flying. I feel I am searching for the sun. I am passing up through another level. It is nighttime, a starry night sky. I can feel the presence of our sun. I am pretty far out. I feel I am being irradiated by cosmic forces as I fly: a shamanic empowerment thing, I guess. I feel very powerful and also gentle. I am still flying higher and higher. There are all kinds of energies in space. Solar winds. There’s light and all kinds of energies. Just soaring higher and higher.…Time seems to slow down. Everything just seems real relaxed. I am just floating around the clouds. Just floating around. I feel as though I can almost levitate. Just flying. Higher and higher, through one barrier after another. I don’t know if there is any limit to the number of levels. I feel the presence of a bright light. I am flying upwards to merge with the light. It is going to be tough to come back. I am having a really good time. I am flying, soaring, flying around. I feel the light. Flying higher and higher. I go through another barrier. A bright light. I feel the universe is basically good.… I am in the upper Upper World. It is beautiful. It’s like a beautiful floating island. There is a very bright light all around it. A magical place. I keep flying higher and higher. Great wings. I hear celestial music in the background. Music of the spheres. I thought there wasn’t supposed to be sound in space. Time to return. It is a long way back. I am soaring back. In a whirlwind. In a cloud tunnel. Going down fast through worlds. I’m back. It is kind of hard for me to talk right now. The message to me is: everything is interrelated. I am still kind of up in the air. Literally.10 HEAVENLY CHOIRS AND CELESTIAL MUSIC As in the previous example, when Westerners ascend they often hear “unearthly” singing or music described in such terms as “heavenly choirs,” “celestial music,” or “music of the spheres.” Similarly, I experienced “the most beautiful singing I have ever heard in my life” as I floated upward during my first drinking of ayahuasca in 1961 among the Conibo people of the Amazon (reported in The Way of the Shaman). We are experiencing here much more than just the effects of a consciousness-changing plant or repetitive drumming: we are entering another reality whose existence does not depend on the door we use. Following are sample reports by Westerners who heard heavenly or celestial choirs and music as they ascended on the sound of monotonous drumming. As always, the words “heaven,” “heavens,” “music,” and “singing” were not mentioned or implied beforehand, and journeyers were given no mission other than to ascend to the Upper World to see what they might find. This next account is from a professional psychologist. “THE MOST HEAVENLY MUSIC IMAGINABLE” To my surprise, I began to hear music when I was amidst the stars. I honestly believed that one of Professor Harner’s colleagues had turned on a tape of heavenly music. I wanted to open my eyes to see if this had happened but did not do so. “What if,” I wondered, “the music was not from a tape but was a gift from spirit?” I focused completely on the music, first hearing flutes and deep-sounding horns. I was startled by its beauty and clarity. The horns became an ensemble of French horns and were accompanied by a lush section of cello and strings. It was so absolutely divine that I wished I could remember every note or have some means of recording it. I am a musician and knew I was not imagining inner music, but hearing a live performance of instruments that felt fully present in the room. Though absorbed in the music, I noticed I was still traveling. In the distance was a large circular stadium, a coliseum with rays of bright white light shining out of it, upwards into the universe. The music was coming from inside this place. As I moved closer to the stadium, it began to turn, first slowly and then with great velocity. The structure became thin like a disk, enabling sacred signals to be discerned in the center of the disk, one after another. The music became louder and the structure spun itself into invisibility. There was nothing to see anymore except for the galaxy. And the ever.present music, the most heavenly music imaginable. I indulged in its beauty until I heard the [drummed] signal that it was time to return. [The drumming] opened the door to an experience that expanded my heart and soul. I was also very surprised that this simple technique could deliver such a profound experience. I want to hear that music again. I look forward to seeing and hearing where the drum takes me.…11 Again, this ascension and those of other participants were not “guided meditations,” for the journeyers were given only the barest methodological instruction beforehand and were not told what to expect. Similarly, no “voice-over” or other instructions were provided during their journeys. The intention was for the participants to have their own autonomous experiences to the highest degree possible. A HAUNTING AND DRAMATIC MELODY Here is the report of another person ascending for the first time to the Upper World who also heard beautiful music. Initially I had difficulty feeling comfortable about a take-off point. I was torn between going up the chimney of my childhood home, or going up from Mt. Tamalpais. I finally felt called most strongly to Mt. Tamalpais, and I discovered it to be relatively easy. I spent a few moments above San Francisco looking down on all the beautiful scenery of the Bay Area. Soon I felt myself floating upward in a prone position on my back. I went through a layer of clouds or fog and entered a totally nondescript place that was just dull gray everywhere. The most interesting thing about this place was that I heard music. It sounded like a single violin, playing a very beautiful yet haunting melody. This music was the most dramatic part of this journey. It was clear enough that it was difficult for me to believe that there was not someone actually playing an instrument in the room where we were holding the workshop. I felt myself wanting to ask other participants if they heard it too. Yet few shared that they heard music, and those who did heard different sounds.12 SINGING AND CHANTING The following journeyer experienced singing, as well as the commonly reported feeling of being expected by persons waiting there in the Upper World. I found myself in an environment of cubes and angles, geometric forms made of crystal, diamonds, and marble, and it was hard and cold. I sort of felt my way in and around the cracks, forms, and crevices. Suddenly I was in a courtyard, or open patio-like affair. There was an expanse of white marble, with a shallow round pool in the center, perhaps three feet in diameter. There were curved benches arranged around and facing the pool. At the center of the pool was a golden goblet or chalice with jewels encrusted on its surface, and perhaps there were jewels within it. I heard chanting in male voices ahead of me, like Gregorian chants, and an answering chorus of female voices responded from behind me. My attention was diverted to my left and I saw another area a few steps down toward another expanse of marble, at which center was a round bowl, or pit, which was blazing with fire. I passed through the fire and felt buoyant but not consumed. I then became aware of people, and I knew them as the elders, or grandfathers. They were expecting me. I asked if certain persons (from my ordinary-reality self) were there, like Jesus or one of the Indian gurus, Paramahansa Yogananda. I was told that they were at a higher level. All the exchanges were like mental telepathy. I then observed myself. I was brown-skinned and wearing a ceremonial white garment with a red sash, which somehow seemed important. The elders had encircled me, and suddenly I looked to my right, up a flight of stairs—wide at the bottom but narrowing at the top, sort of like a flattened pyramid. I saw an altar at the top.…13 LOVE AND BEAUTY I was picked up by a big bird, who flew me far, far away to my spiritual home. There I became a light being living with other light beings around me. I asked the question, “Where did I come from before my birth?” These light beings then took me on another journey to a very green place. Beautiful, incredible green that is unlike any green in ordinary reality. It is a beautiful forest, like nothing I have even imagined. It was so incredibly beautiful and green; it smelled heavenly and the trees hummed music. I was taken into the heart of the forest, where there was a room. I sat and looked all around this forest room, feeling the love of the forest washing over me, nurturing and loving me. Then I was taken up, up, up, up through the green where I was shown circles around circles around circles, all circles of love and how we are all love. I’ve never seen or felt that kind of love and it was so green. I was shown that my love of trees in ordinary reality came from this place, and that trees in ordinary reality are that loving all the time. Trees are here to show us that love; they carry that love on the planet for us. [The fast drumming call-back sounds.] It would appear that I came from a nonordinary-reality forest where I lived as a light being in green grace and love. How incredibly beautiful!14 LEARNING METAMORPHOSIS AND HEARING VOICES SINGING My first journey was to the Upper World. Climbing up my ancient Oak Tree at the top of a mountain, I find Hawk descending to pick me up and carry me to my destination. I ride her as a small child up into the air currents. She encourages me to step off and fly on my own, experiencing the freedom and weightlessness of being out of a material body. Higher and higher I soar to the outer universe. Sailing effortlessly, I am picked up by Dragon and flown to a parallel portal, to an antechamber of golden hues. There is a domed glass top, like a planetary observatory. I find myself floating up into the center, surrounded by a library of books of knowledge, all around me. This is a place where I experience a new sense of “body.” I am making a transition: letting go of old sensations, learning to metamorphose into new ones. I am then lowered to the floor and move out of a door into a tunnel. When I reach the end of this portal, I exit by parting veils and emerge into a beautiful ethereal landscape of hills, clouds, and a sky of vibrant colors. I come to a fountain made of the same luminescent hues and hear voices and then see faces of a man and a woman, who appear telling me to disrobe and step into the waters of the fountain for cleansing, a necessary cleansing, of all that I have brought with me. I then touch my body. It still has the image of the earthly body, but it is now transparent and radiating with energy. My hand passes right through my new body. I step into the fountain to experience rainbow water pouring out of me in all directions. I become the fountain. All is rearranged and I feel a complete sense of freedom from dis-ease. I hear voices singing. I step out of the fountain and find that I am circled by hooded beings robed in luminescent light. I hear a sound vortex and am invited to merge with it. I go into it without hesitation to be restructured in preparation for my journey upwards.15 ASCENDING TO CRYSTALS AND CRYSTAL ARCHITECTURE In the following example, the person used light rays from above to help his ascension. This first-time visitor to the Upper World was unaware that rising on rays of light (as are seen shining down between clouds) was a favorite technique of indigenous shamans in Siberia and Australia.16 This person subsequently encountered a crystal column and crystal staircase, and was unaware that Australian aboriginals often found quartz crystal manifestations in the Upper World. For example, the Australian deity-teacher Baiame was encountered on journeys to the Upper World. Sitting on a giant crystal, he initiated his visitors by sprinkling liquefied quartz or “solidified light” to connect them to the sky or Upper World.17 Quartz crystals are commonly venerated and used by indigenous shamans in many parts of the world.18 I used a chimney to go up. When I got through the barrier, it was like walking on clouds.… Then suddenly I saw a light source above me with rays coming down. I used them to go higher and came to an opening above me. I passed up through it and saw something like angels dancing very gently around a crystal column made of rods. The column was very bright and transparent and was constructed similarly to an ancient Roman fasces [a symbol of authority made of a bundle of rods with a protruding axe blade]. I stayed there a while. Then a crystal spiral staircase appeared. I climbed it and arrived at the steps of a castle, like kings used to have in old Europe.… Then it disappeared. I returned on the carpet to the previous level and then came back here.19 A note: In the above adventure, the Westerner at one point found himself using a flying carpet. This is a technique I have actually experimented with considerably, creating a device involving auditory driving that may resemble a similar ancient shamanistic use in the Near East.20 A CRYSTAL CITY, CLIMBING A GOLDEN LADDER, AND BEING TOLD TO RETURN This person had made previous ascensions to the Upper World but did not follow the training instructions to depart from a place in the Middle World. Instead she departed from a place in the Upper World (apparently the first level). Ascending, she encountered a crystal city, asked to go higher, had to climb a golden ladder, and then was told that she had “seen enough for now” and needed to return to learn more before she could “go any farther.” I am not surprised. That more needs to be learned is indicated by the fact that she did not depart from the Middle World as she was told to do in the ascension instructions. Her experience reminds one of Jacob’s ladder in the Old Testament and how he could not go farther. It would be interesting to know if she knew the story. I went with my power animal to the place I always start in the Upper World. This is a beautiful grotto, with jagged white walls and a healing pool. To the left of this grotto, as I enter it, is a path that leads up to a very high peak … a place from which I can see the whole universe, and from where I get “launched” into the void. I went to this peak and asked to be shown more. From this peak I went through another membrane and found myself on the second level of the Upper World. There I met a man who had come to me in my dreams on the day I was notified that I had been accepted into the workshop. He told me, at that time, that he was my father from another life and that I would find out more about him [later].He took me to a Crystal City, where he seemed to play some guide/guardian role. This city was located in a large valley, surrounded by alabaster cliffs. The city was made up entirely of crystal structures. Each structure was a different color (clear, pink, purple, blue, green, gold, etc.). Some had water flowing through them, some had wind blowing, some were warm, some cool, but each was perfectly designed to evoke the vibration of that type of crystal. Each structure was like a cathedral and had its own spirits that were humming to that crystal’s vibration. I walked to the end of this valley and went around the alabaster cliffs to the right. Here was a vast slope, the edge of which dropped off to infinity. On the slope, in beautiful light, was a celestial herb garden. I asked to go one level higher. To get there I had to climb a golden ladder by myself. When I broke through the membrane at the top of the ladder, I found myself standing on an enormous white lotus flower. There were numerous beings at the center of the flower but I could not see who they were. All I discovered was that to move in this landscape I had to do a combination of swimming, walking, and dancing. The surface moved under my feet and distinctions were blurred between what was material and what was nonmaterial. Then I was suddenly told I had seen enough for now, that I needed to return to the first level and learn more there before I could go any farther.21 EXPLORING LEVELS OF THE UPPER WORLD In this next group of reports, each of the following workshop or seminar participants had the same mission—to explore the levels of the Upper World—but they all returned with quite different information about the levels and their content. This is an important aspect of nonordinary reality in the Upper World. As I noted earlier, everyone has a different personal background, so in order to have spiritually the same experience (i.e., a perfect experience), it must be perfect for that individual. This is one of the differences between nonordinary and ordinary reality; the latter is not tailored by the spirits to be perfect. CHANGES NOTED WHEN ASCENDING LEVELS This is a brief “black and white” report on what one person encountered after ascending through the first level of the Upper World. Level 2: This seemed similar to level 1, but more refined and rarefied. Here were some figures from history, such as George Washington, Socrates, Plato, and others. Level 3: I reached this level by ascending a cone-like mountain, like Mt. Fuji. More rarefied. I found it harder to see what was there, but I was aware of the presence of people. Level 4: Here again was more light. “Matter” was more refined. I heard “music,” which took the form of long chords, which were sounded and held for a long time. There was the sound of voices singing like a large chorus. Levels 5 & 6: These were similar. The music changed but continued, but I could not see or easily make out forms. Level 7: Here I became aware of an enormous globe, the sun. However, the sun was not hot. I felt myself being pulled toward the sun. As I was pulled into the sun, the last vestiges of my body seemed to evaporate. I felt no body awareness. However, I still felt an individual consciousness. That last bit of individuality was all that separated me from pure bliss and peace.22 THROUGH MANY LEVELS, AND EXPERIENCING ENCOMPASSING LOVE I … went up through fifteen transitions (or levels) of darkness and colored light energies. I first encountered darkness and a webbing (across the darkness). I went through that layer into more darkness, with a few purple lights, and then to the next layer, which was more darkness with green lights. I continued up and out through darkness with a purple swirling energy and up again through darkness with a yellow-green energy. At about this point, I heard a chorus that was exquisite, with a harmonic, resonant quality having two different tones. I went up further and encountered more darkness with a purple-light energy that kept sweeping across my view. The next layer brought more darkness and gray fog, and the next was again darkness and purple energy. At this point I decided to turn around and look back toward where I had come from [Earth]. I saw this incredible mixture of all the light— power forms that I had passed through. It was very, very beautiful and multidimensional. I could not see Earth … but I felt its presence in the great expansiveness of universal life energy. Among this dark background (that I was viewing), I just saw colored energies floating by and through … green … yellow … purple. I had no feeling of need to return (to Earth). I just felt love … an overwhelming, all encompassing … love. After soaking that in for a while, I turned around to continue on my journey and I followed the chorus up, up … into the blotchy, dotted, gray fog. At that point we were called back. So I returned back to Earth through the darkness and all the swirling, colored energies.23 THROUGH A ROTATING CYLINDER TO LEVELS OF ASCENDING BRIGHTNESS I made a really rapid ascent. I went through a whole series of levels in ascending brightness. From gray to beige, to tan, gold, yellow, back to white—one after the other, very rapidly, in a kind of rotating cylinder. Finally I got to beyond white, to a kind of crystal color. A crystal color space.I asked, “Is this as far as I can go?” A side of the crystal color space opened and showed me the stars. They weren’t familiar constellations at all, but spread around in a way I couldn’t recognize. One of the stars seemed to beckon, so I went off toward it very quickly and arrived in quite a different world. The inhabitants appeared to be sapphire exclamation points, if you could imagine that. They were floating around about a quarter of their height above the ground, and there was architecture to match. I was just starting to be able to converse with them when the drumming signal sounded for my return.24 In this journey, as in many near-death experiences, the person ascended a tunnel (in this case, a rotating cylinder) associated with increasing brightness of light. After passing through seven different-hued levels and entering a world of sapphire people, the journeyer started to converse with them. These conversations probably could be pursued in future visits. ODIN AND THE NECTAR OF THE GODS I was met by a man in a blue cloak with gold trim and a gold headdress with an eagle on his shoulder. I walked with him to a grand palace-like place where there were many, many people in a long hall in a circle and a wolf lying on the floor. They offered me mead—the nectar of the gods —in a beautiful goblet. The man said he was Odin. On one side of him was Sigrun and on the other side two women whose names were Lara and Kristin. They were in white. I asked him who all the people were and he said they were my family and that I had met many of them before. Then a long table was laid and I sat at the head of the table with the man—I kept telling him he couldn’t be Odin. I asked him to introduce me to the people. There was food placed on the table in big bowls and there was cheese and bread. Then I was out walking on the grounds. The castle was above a beautiful lake, and there were huge grounds with apartment-like places on a hill. He (Odin, or someone I was walking with) told me I was always welcome here and that I could stay here whenever I wanted. I saw Dad there as a young man. I saw Amma and Sigrun. It was a bright and open and very beautiful place, with what seemed like lots of people. I felt a bit overwhelmed by it all. When the call-back came I was still exploring the grounds with someone. I found it quite emotional when I was leaving and then quite bewildering when I was there. It seemed to be too much. I wanted to know who people were and I felt confused. I felt welcomed at the same time as I felt kind of taken for granted.25 A THRONE ROOM AND CROWN, AND EATING A SPIRITUAL OFFERING In this experience the person discovers that she belongs to a spiritual family and that “all forms have been used as expressions of this spiritual family.” In shamanic cultures and myth, accepting food in other worlds is usually considered an important event. I went up into the night sky, passing stars and animal forms. These forms were interchangeable, morphing from one to another as I went past them. I was told this: “All forms have been used as expressions of this spiritual family. You belong to a very large and powerful spiritual family.”I kept flying up and saw animal forms morphing through the Milky Way and beyond. Finally I arrived at a large pearly-white, luminescent, and cloudlike cylindrical place. And then I discovered a large Roman.style circular hall nearby. In it I saw a fountain with a turning wheel. [A spirit] said, “The wheel is the symbol of this spiritual family.” There were many beings in this hall, dressed in all styles of costumes from different earth cultures—Egyptian, Mayan, Tibetan, Japanese, Chinese, and others. Then I saw a large atrium surrounded by multiple floors that glowed in a pearly and golden light. It seemed to me that there were many rooms on each of the floors. I did not visit these rooms; instead I went back to the area connected to the circular Roman-style hall. I realized that I was in a huge castle-like compound. Across the grounds was another building. I went inside and saw a majestic hall. A huge circular table in the shape of a wheel (donut shape) filled up this hall. I sat down at the table and food was served to me. There were no servers waiting on me; instead the food just appeared on the table. The surface of the table worked like a conveyer belt. Dish after dish came from my right-hand side and passed in front of me. First, I was served a snow-topped mountain, then a forest, a mountain stream, all kinds of vegetables, and other food we found in OR [ordinary reality]. I noticed that I had tears coming down my cheek … because I felt so deeply touched. I ingested the food offered to me, and at the same time images of my OR house kept coming up. I understood that my OR life was sustained by all the spiritual food I’ve been given. The contents of my OR life corresponded to the possibilities and reality in my spiritual home. I saw also many morphing images of animals and buildings. Finally a platter of religious symbols and icons was served to me. It was like a three-dimensional collage of religious symbols and sacred places from all ages and civilizations on Earth. I was delighted and “ate” this special offering. It was as though the essence and wisdom of all religions known by the human race was now given to me. Next I went to a throne room. I was given a crown and a floor-length cape; both were made out of fresh pink roses. I felt like the whole universe was in me. It was such an honor. Then I was shown a circle of roses floating in the night sky. It looked like a chain of rose buds. My spirit family was one of the roses, connected to many other spiritual families in one big cosmic circle. As we were all connected, I felt a sense of love from the other spiritual families. I felt that they would welcome my visit. I returned from the journey knowing that all the forms/manifestations were all connected to me and in me. It was a profound journey.26 In the above report, the Westerner is welcomed with a feast and, through eating a special dish, absorbed “the essence and wisdom of all religions.” The feast and the message are consistent with the sense of welcome and spiritual unity in accounts of the Upper World, overwhelming differences in details of individual experiences. DEITIES AND DECEASED PERSONS Indigenous shamans ascending to the Upper World are reported to receive help there from powerful spirits in human form whom they recognize as gods, goddesses, demi-gods, and sacred ancestors. Such spirits can include deities generally known in their cultures, as well as ones revealed specifically to the individual shaman, such as deceased shamans of the person’s family. Although the spirits may be deities, shamans’ relationships with them are highly personal, as illustrated by Salish shamans, who commonly call them “partners,” as they do animal and other spirits who work in tandem with the shaman. In other words, indigenous shamans are on intimate terms with such entities. They do not believe in the existence of Upper World deities but rather know them personally, much as they know their families in ordinary reality. For them, such beings are not a matter of belief but of firsthand individual knowledge. In contrast, the indigenous nonshaman may only have belief in their existence and thus could be considered an animist. What happens when contemporary Westerners undertake shamanic ascension without any hint that they might encounter deity-like forms? PHILOSOPHERS, COMPOSERS, AND THE VIRGIN MARY The Westerners, with some astonishment, often encountered deities in the Upper World. The following example describes an ascent by a German classical pianist who had been a proclaimed atheist and Communist. I started my journey up through a fireplace and chimney that I know, and went up with the smoke … and rose up to a flying carpet of clouds [the barrier] where I saw a small golden statue of Buddha. With the smoke I went up again to another white flying carpet of clouds. There I saw figures in white garments with laurel on their heads in a procession. At first they seemed not to notice my presence. Then they came together and talked over what to do with me. One man separated from the others, came over to me, and indicated the way up to another level, where there was a bearded old man who was dressed in a white cotton sheet. He sat in front of a dark forest and waved me into it. The woods were very dark and I was a bit afraid. Then the scene changed into a fairytale forest where I met Rumpelstiltskin in a red outfit, Sleeping Beauty, and Cinderella. I was dressed in a pink gown. A young prince, dressed in blue, came and took my hand. He led me through the woods to a castle that resembled one of the French chateaus in the Loire, with a water moat around it. The prince led me over a bridge and up some wide steps to the open entrance where Bach received me. Bach led me inside to a huge dining hall where many people were feasting. There was a lot of conversation that seemed to be very interesting. Hegel came over to say hello, and we sat down where Mozart was sitting. Mozart and I talked about the hazards of family life. After a while he rose, and we went to a piano and played some notes together. Then he played alone, and on the tones I flew up to the sun, which had an invincible force of attraction. I became afraid of the heat and light, and looked for an escape, something like a cool moon. But there was no possibility of running away. After a short, searing flight, I landed in the lap of a woman who seemed to be Mary, the Queen of the Sky. Beside her sat her husband, the Father of All Gods. The sun was there in the form of a large golden ball, suspended in space. I felt very cozy, although just a little bit afraid of the unusual situation. The way back down was quick and very easy.27 Following her return, this participant said that because Hegel’s dialectic philosophy was important to Marxism, she found it easy to accept encountering him in the Upper World. Likewise, since she was a classical pianist, she accepted meeting Bach and Mozart there. However, as an avowed atheist, she was amazed to meet “Mary, Queen of the Sky,” wife of “the Father of All Gods.” She was also surprised that she had found the experience of sitting on Mary’s lap “cozy.” (She later identified this figure as the Virgin Mary.) Her experience exemplifies the intimate encounters that visitors to the Upper World commonly have with legendary heroes and gods. The fact that she felt some fear was a good sign, for any experience of emotion, whether fear or love, indicates that one has really entered nonordinary reality. Not surprisingly, this journeyer soon abandoned atheism, and she went to India to spend many years at a Hindu ashram. GREAT HUMANITARIANS AND THINKERS Ascending to the Upper World, this journeyer reached a level that: … looked like a cross between a Maxfield Parrish and Alma Tadema landscape but was far more beautiful. There was a great lake, and at one end was a lovely bright-blue jeweled waterfall. There were white marble-like columns and domed structures where one could sit and muse. The hues of gold, sienna—very autumnal colors—seeped into the landscape. There were broad, quiet lawns and trees of many kinds. It felt like I was stepping into a painting. The strains and colors of light were extraordinary—yellow, rose, peach, orange, red, umber. The greatest humanitarians and thinkers were there in small groups chatting, or sitting alone and writing, or musing by the lake, including Einstein, Copernicus, Christ, Dante, Shakespeare, Jung, Gandhi, Mother Teresa, da Vinci, and others. It was very quiet, but you could feel that great discussions and decisions were being made here by these spirits in human form. I was drawn to the waterfall, and when I got there, I discovered that when I drank the water, all truth was revealed to me. I bathed in it and was shown my essence. It was the truth of my essence almost.28 BUDDHA AND TEARS OF JOY I travel away, fast, upwards I go. I am nothing but a speck of consciousness in a vast Universe. Like a particle of stellar dust, I travel through infinity. I see a dark tunnel that leads to great silver light. I hear music. I am music. I continue traveling through many layers, levels and layers of these levels. I witness much light as I see new souls being embraced at various levels by beings of light. I see Jesus embracing new souls with great love. I travel through a cloudlike layer and visit a level of staggering, almost overwhelming luminosity. There are many Buddhas in this level. I am compelled to continue traveling. I am nothingness. Yet I am within my own conscious perceptions. I see Earth and the Solar System. I visit a “ring” of Energy, luminous and powerful energy vibrating around the planet. I feel love for Earth, much love. I am compelled to share this love, joining in the great white band of light around our planet. As I become part of this light, I experience even more love and immense compassion. Beings of Light are constantly working with higher vibrations and light towards humankind. But I must travel, as infinity is forever. I sense that perhaps I can stay in the “nothingness” or return to near Earth and assist with the great white ring of light. But no, I must go through an opening in the vastness in which I encounter myself. This opening is like a gigantic mouth of a jar made of pure light. I enter and, once again, I become Light. Incredible warmth and peacefulness fulfill my senses, my body, and my mind. Now I experience pure joy! I see a Buddha. Earth is the first chakra within Buddha. There are other Buddhas within the first Buddha, just like a babushka doll. The joy and laughter of the Buddha within a thousand Buddhas fills eternity. The echo of their laughter creates an array of colorful geometric vibrations in the Universe. I feel immense joy. I need to laugh as if laughter is me. We are in Buddha’s body and Buddha is within us. Buddha’s consciousness is self-realized after the unveiling of many layers of illusions, just as a metaphor of Buddhas inside the Buddha is infinitely perpetuating, while remaining the essential “Omniscience and Nothingness.” I sense tears of joy and laughter running down my cheeks. I send my laughter into the Universe. The drum calls me back.29 JESUS, BUDDHA, AND BECOMING PART OF EVERYTHING Running, flying down. Climbing up the mountain. The big lizard is carrying me onto the volcano. The darkness that is nothingness. A kind of grayness, a new layer? An opening. Some shadows. Suddenly I am sitting on the edge of the new moon, out in the sky. A new opening—I am continuing into the third layer. Very far away, I can see a gray mountain. I am climbing up the mountain. The crystal … a cave? I am sitting down on some kind of a table. It’s very light, like a sun, just an enormous brightness. A cave, a teacher? I continue through openings, holes, doors … more grayness, too. I am stopping for a while. Clouds. Up one more layer. I am meeting Jesus, the picture-book Jesus in blue and pink. He is saying, “You shall continue. The old Asian teacher is somewhere near: Buddha.” Up again, now I cannot continue. I become a part of the drum, of everything. Somewhere I can hear “silver music,” the music of the stars. It disappears and only the drum is there, the light, the total energy is there. I feel pain in my body. Surprised by how can I feel pain once I became a part of melting into the totalness/nothingness. There in the room, I can see the others back in the brightness, the air, the sound. The call-back sound. I am trying to get back the same way. Jesus, the teacher, the gray mountains, the black volcano. The vulture birds. Down the mountain, through the woods. Here in the room, totally displaced. I am here, my body is here, my mind is only partly here.…30 A fine journey, with the usual deities, music, and union with “totalness/nothingness.” What might appear unusual is her feeling of pain toward the end of her journey, as this has consistently been absent in the Upper and Lower Worlds. When it has occurred in such journeying, it is when the person is starting to reenter ordinary reality. Similarly, in this case she was already aware of the room and the other students before she had completely returned from the journey. It is no accident that I often call the Middle World the “pain reality.” THE CREATOR AND JESUS, FLOATING INTO THE LIGHT, AND BEAUTIFUL VOICES I am standing before a tunnel, which is guarded by dogs. I see a light in the tunnel. I see silhouettes of dark figures moving through the light. I am very confused. I want to know who the figures are. I am told that it is not my business. I walk back to the beginning of the tunnel several times. Finally I remember that my intention is to go as far as I can. I leave the tunnel and I enter a misty place. There is a very beautiful red-haired woman with a catlike face and Eastern Indian costume, dancing. I feel like she wants my complete attention. It doesn’t feel right to stay there. I see a stairway going up, and I run up the stairs. At the top of the stairs is a green field. At the end of the field is a structure, which I walk toward and arrive at all at once. There are many beings in Greek/Roman dress. I think the structure is a temple and that they are deities. A woman approaches and invites me to sit on a throne placed between giant pillars. As soon as I sit on the throne a blinding white cocoon of light envelops me. When I emerge from the light I have eight arms, like a Shiva statue. A rope of light falls from the sky. I pull myself up the rope of light and enter a beautiful garden. I am walking with another woman. We are wearing white garments that seem to be made of light. I’m approaching a teahouse where I know I will see the Beloved. I enter and the light is very dim. His face is in the shadow. I cherish the silhouette of his face. He reaches across the table and I am suddenly dissolved into music that sounds like frogs or crickets or flutes and there is a haze of light. I stay with this light and music for a long time. It is very beautiful. There are no words to describe the beauty. While I am merged with this music and light I begin to see faces, of both men and women. I don’t know these people, but there is something familiar about them and I see them with profound clarity. Suddenly I am walking across a misty hilltop. I see the back of a woman in a simple sari. I approach her and ask if I’m supposed to meet with her. She turns toward me and I sit down in front of her. She looks ordinary at first, but then she starts to change and she looks very rich and very real with a kind of beauty that older women have. She sits on the ground before me and separates her legs and she starts to pull out food as if she were giving birth to it. Not ordinary food, beautifully prepared food. She keeps doing this till there are piles of food everywhere the eye looks, all around us. This stuns and delights me and finally I realize that she is the Creator, and when I realize this she embraces me and kisses my mouth. I dissolve again in this kiss and I am taken to a bluff over a beach. It is twilight and there is a beautiful sunset. The sky is striped with colors. I notice that the water is dark and the waves are huge. I can see individuals on a ship out at sea with sails and oars and they are struggling in the surf. I think, “I am completely at peace and they are struggling.” … A man dressed in a biblical costume comes walking up the beach and then I realize it is Jesus. I am surprised at my reaction to him: aversion and anger. I realize that I blame Jesus for all the damage that the Christian churches have done. Jesus reaches out and puts something in my hand. I realize it is a key, and as soon as I recognize that, I find myself standing in front of a solid gold door and I know that it is the “door of choice.” I enter the door and notice that there are two exits from the chamber. One door is open and I can see many beings walking down a spiral ramp. I am beginning to feel stuck here because I don’t really know what choice to make. I ask if I can see behind the other closed door. This door looks like a rabbit hole, and I realize it is the way to come back to life on Earth. Since this wasn’t my purpose, I ask if I can proceed. I enter the other door and see a spiral going down. Many beings are walking on this path. It seems almost infinite and ends in a brilliant light. I jump off the ramp and float into the light like a dandelion seed. I wonder how long my consciousness might remain separate. “Your choice,” I am told immediately. I fly over a sea with a group of eagles. There is the sound of beautiful voices singing the word “home” over and over. Again I am confused and wonder if I am hearing the word “home” or “om.” We are dropped onto a beach. There are many animal beings on the beach where we land. The [drummed] call.back is given and I return.31 DEPARTED RELATIVES, ANGELS, MUSIC, AND ALL-ENCOMPASSING LOVE I was very upset and confused at first—unsettling, as it seems it wasn’t an entirely smooth passing … Two angels came for me and took me to a garden, to a bench in lovely grass under a beautiful tree. First my father came to me. He waved his hand and a pond appeared before me with small lily pads and frogs hopping. One of them spit a pearl out of its mouth into my hand. I put it in my pocket. Then my father waved the pond away. Next my Aunt X appeared. She waved her hand and I was at the bottom of a tiny sand pit where I was visited by all the plants and animals, rocks and ocean, everything. She then waved this away. Then my mother appeared. She told me she was sorry for what she had done to me as a child. I told her I had forgiven her. She waved a pond into the scene as smooth as glass. I lay on it as a child and was filled with healing light. Soon, I as the child went back into my adult body.Light was streaming down from above and reflecting up. The angels took me up into layer after layer. There was one with crystal cities, one rather flat with jewels. Each one got more and more simple. There were clouds, rainbows, and streams of light. I heard flutes, other music, and singing. Light was streaming past. I lost my sense of self—was dispersed with what seemed to be the Life Force, heard hmmmm, thunder, and more hmmmmm. I was part of an incredible yellow light, feeling very blissful, alive, intense, at times almost a sexual feeling for want of a better description. I felt all.encompassing love.32 DEPARTED RELATIVES, THE “GREAT ONE,” AND BEING UNCONDITIONAL LOVE I began to feel like there was no more “me” in the sense I was accustomed to. How curious this was. I was then thrust forward and found myself in a purple place that was round. It sparkled with deep purple crystals. Then I was on deep purple dirt with deep green plants. Next I was into a ball of golden orange with oriental petals of movement. I was in a garden where I could hear the plants and the angels singing. I would hear babies crying, people talking, and I felt like I was part of everything. I felt like animals, plants, people, air, dirt, and God. I was everything. I was bubbling in and out of myself, bubbling from within myself out into myself. I felt like a huge ball on top of another ball. I said, “Where am I?” I heard in my mind, “The one mind, the one all.” Then I heard the flowers singing and I saw my grandfather, my father, my mother, my niece, and my great-grandmother. Since I had never met or even seen a picture of my great grandmother, I remember thinking, “So this is what you look like.” Then I saw the Great One. I felt like a shining diamond. I felt illuminated and peaceful; I knew everything and knew I knew everything. I understood everything. I was at peace beyond belief. I was power, gentleness, unconditional love, light, hope, excitement, new life, everything.33 9 Teachers—Compassionate Spirits Who Advise Lots of people who dream [ascend by drumming] to heaven—they don’t see God. They just see the people who are working for God. —Words of the Dunne-za (Beaver Indian) shamans of British Columbia1 My [spirit] companion then said “… when you come here, ask questions … You will be a great shaman indeed, you find out everything.” —Words from a spirit teacher to a Siberian Nganasan shaman on a journey to the Lower World2 Indigenous shamans and Westerners alike have commonly reported the existence of anthropomorphic deities and sacred ancestors in the Upper World. These are perhaps best understood as transcended compassionate spirits that have ascended above the conflicts of the Middle World, in contrast to the quasi-compassionate ethnocentric spirits remaining behind. These transcended spirits have been found to be unconditionally ready to respond to anyone who reaches them seeking advice or a healing. They also seem to avoid giving advice that might, when carried back to the Middle World, cause pain or suffering to any being.In my teaching of students in experiential shamanism, however, I avoided using such spiritual terms as “deities” or “gods” in order to give them maximum freedom to make their own discoveries, as did the Foundation faculty I trained. Therefore I introduced the use of the term “teacher” to give students the objective of visiting a secularly defined person. The students were told in advance that the teachers could be historically famous persons. The intention here included an effort to avoid “programming” journeyers to expect to meet religious figures. Nonetheless, these Westerners soon found out for themselves that quite a few of their teachers turned out to be famous religious figures. They were simply asked to seek their own unknown anthropomorphic teachers in the Upper World. The assumption was, and remains, that they were not “getting” a new teacher but rather bringing to consciousness one that was already there. Then when they encountered a being in human form who admitted to being that person’s teacher, they were to ask a question or make a healing request. The Westerners were asked to go to the Upper World, following the instructions in Appendix A, but they were not told its characteristics, other than it was “up,” nor what to encounter there, other than being asked to find a teacher. The identities, locations, and environments of their teachers were entirely their own discoveries, as were their experiences.Seeking help in this individualistic way is part of shamanism, and it is the essence of what the Westerners were assigned to do here. This chapter is devoted to representative accounts of their experiences finding teachers and seeking advice from them. A few more relevant items need to be mentioned. The indigenous Salish people of British Columbia and Washington State often refer to such an anthropomorphic spirit as “the Indian” or “power man,” as distinguished from a “power animal.” However, it should be noted that the teachers in human form can also appear as animals or in any form they choose, as well as invisibly “manage” anyone’s experiences in a journey after that person has asked for their help. The Westerners in the present study were already familiar with calling on power animals for help during their earlier shamanic journeys to the Lower World. Readers will find power animals commonly assisting the Westerners in their Upper World work in the accounts to come. Having already gone “over the rainbow,” the Westerners were ready to learn more of the work shamans do there. One important task is to obtain answers for people to their hitherto unanswered questions, much as they had already learned in the Lower World with the help of a power animal. As readers already know, “divination” refers to getting hidden (“occult”) knowledge that people have not yet been able to find in ordinary reality. Indigenous peoples commonly depend on the interaction of shamans with their helping spirits to obtain important, even life-saving information for members of their societies. After that Lower World task was complete, the next divinatory task for the Westerners was to go to the Upper World to ask their teacher a question. There compassionate spirits in human form are normally easy to find. Often their answers and advice are not what people want, but what the teachers think they need, for the teachers may have their own opinions that contrast with those of the visitors. The visitors typically later find that the teachers were right. The first step for the Westerners was to find an Upper World being in human form and ask it the simple question, “Are you my teacher?” The answer always seems reliable, for in the Upper World we do not find prevarication, which appears rather to be a feature of the Middle World. Persons first visiting the Upper World are often surprised by the identities of teachers waiting for them. For example, when I briefly taught shamanism in Moscow during the early 1980s, two of my students who were involved in the then-Communist government wondered if they would meet Karl Marx or Lenin in their shamanic ascensions. Instead they encountered Moses and Buddha! On a later visit, one of my students discovered his teacher to be Czar Nicholas. Here in North America, members of the Christian clergy often found their teachers to be ancient Greek and Egyptian deities, Native Americans, or Hindu saints, a result that most seemed to accept. In other words, there commonly was an ecumenical aspect to their experiences. Likewise, agnostics, atheists, and Jewish visitors are frequently surprised to find that their teacher is Jesus or a Christian saint. To repeat what was said earlier, the word “heaven” was never used or implied in preparing persons to ascend to the Upper World. These Upper World teachers seem consistently to be compassionate beings ready to help and heal all visitors. In addition, each teacher tends to present itself in a form exactly suited to the visitor, regardless of whether it might be an unappealing figure to someone else, especially someone with a very different personal history or from a very different culture. Now let us read some reports by Westerners of their first divination work with an Upper World teacher. Each student had learned the techniques of ascension and how to ask their own divination questions. This is a method that students of shamanism can use to improve their lives. The following pages illustrate some representative teachers and the way the teachers answered questions put to them. THE LESSON OF THE BENT RING My journey to the Upper World to find a teacher and ask a question was extremely profound for me. Once again, we lay down with our eyes closed and covered by a scarf to keep out the light. The room was darkened as well. We were instructed to go to a jumping-off place that we knew in ordinary reality. We would travel upwards and through a barrier or membrane. When we saw a human form we were to ask, “Are you my teacher?” If the answer was yes, we were to ask our question. If we didn’t find a teacher there, we could go up to the next level and try again.The question I decided to ask was, “On my spiritual path, what could/should I be working on now?” This is what happened: I jumped off the porch on the roof of my childhood home. I expected to fly but almost immediately was sucked up in a whirlwind that seemed to be silver and very fast. I went up through a floor and stepped out on a glasslike surface … nothing to ask, got worried, tried to go up again, then thought maybe I hadn’t really given the first level a chance—got panicky that nothing would happen, could see nothing but light. Finally, the Master I had visited in a dream once was by my side smiling in a mock-serious-chiding-protective-lovingly-being-amused-at.my-panic way. He touched my arm the way he did before in the dream, as if it were a sign. Like then, it burned, not a hurting burn, but intense heat, like electricity. He said, “Remember?” I did. I asked if he was my teacher. He looked as if it were inconceivable, my asking after having just felt the energy on/through my arm. But then he smiled and said, “Yes.” I asked what should I be working on now. I heard, “Just that.” I assumed that to mean what I had just experienced: energy transfer, heat-light-particles, like electricity. Before I could ask anything further he seemed to disappear, though I knew he was there. I said, “I can’t see you.” Then I saw a tiny spark hovering-darting-dancing nearby. As I was about to speak to it/him, there was a shift in my perception, which told me he had become big, huge, enormous. All around me was him. I could see nothing but thick violet, swirling, pulsating expansiveness. I was in it/him.I heard, “See.” The word was both a question and a command. He became the original man-form again and told me, “What you see, you are connected to.” Then there was a woman off to his left, my right, just a little above us. He made a gesture as if he were introducing me to her. I couldn’t see her clearly because her form kept changing into many women. She seemed to be The Woman. It was as if what I saw was love, grace, power. (I was going to add “radiance,” but everything in that place seemed to be radiant.) He said, “See behind the veil. See her.” She said, “Like the way you came here. Remember?” I was in awe. Just then the drum signaled to return. Immediately I was traveling back down the spiral at an incredible rate. I opened my eyes and felt as if I were boiling. I was so hot I sat up and tore off my bandana, feeling my forehead. It felt like I was on fire with fever. I looked at my hands and saw that my brand-new silver and emerald ring was all bent out of shape as if it had melted! It took a while for the particles of energy I felt racing in my body to settle down. I went off to lunch feeling like a walking pointillist painting, after Seurat. I’m sure it will take quite a bit longer for the answer I was given to sink in.3 The preceding ascension experience illustrates how the teachers not only answer questions but also can convey immense spiritual power, “like electricity.” In this case, the conveyance of power was the answer to the visitor’s question, as well as a gift for her life. This is something common in working with the teachers: you may ask them for information, and they also give you help. Likewise, if you ask them for help, such as for a healing, they usually not only do the healing but provide information on how to do it to help others. The bent ring was part of that information— about the reality of her experience, and the reality of the power given her. REUNIONS, A LIBRARY, A CHOIR, AND BECOMING NOTHING AND EVERYTHING Much more happened in the following report beyond the words in the heading above. … I floated up the tunnel and there was my Mom and Grandfather … I didn’t want to hug them at first, but then I did, and we all cried and cried. It felt very healing and nice.… I left and found myself on a floor that looked like a library/Greek building. It was very quiet, and I noticed that there were many people, but everyone was focused upon themselves and what they were reading, or looking up. They really didn’t see me or anyone else. My teacher “told” me (in the way she has of giving me volumes in a flash) that they were shaping their path. They believed in reincarnation, so here they were, looking up future lifetimes to live. I looked around and saw that if they looked around they could have seen that there was more to heaven than what they were doing. Since there were no walls, they could have seen other people doing other things.We left and went past a place where people were sitting on clouds or whatever and just taking it easy. We went on by that and came to a place where God and Jesus and Buddha and other beings lived with lots of people around them. It was the heaven of my church teachings, only with all the great masters there. Next we went to a choir, and that was beautiful. The music came into me and my cells became the music. I was very touched. Then we went farther away and I sat, for a few moments, on a quiet hillside. Getting my breath, I guess. My teacher didn’t say anything. We just sat quietly. I asked if there was more. Did all religions have a part of the truth of heaven? Would I find it all here? At that, she took my hand and we floated up higher and came to a place of “light beings.” This felt like the ultimate of ultimates. They could not be too close together because they each gave off so much light. I was fascinated. Light poured out of them for miles and miles. The word “beacon” came to mind, but where the beacon of a lighthouse shines at the top, they shone all around, and for miles the lighted shining part reached out. They were at one with that whole huge mass. I was surprised at how isolated they were. Oh, they were in great shape, energetically, but there wasn’t communication going on with others. I was surprised that I didn’t want to stay, but I didn’t [and] went farther up. Suddenly I became nothing and everything at once. I was like the great I AM. I had no ending, no beginning, and yet I had not lost who I was either. I was so large, so expansive. I feel it as I write, but there are no words to describe it. Utter stillness, utter expansiveness.4 This Westerner received an impressive landslide of information and became nothing and everything. However, the journeyer apparently forgot the instruction to ask only a single question with each visit to a teacher. The “single question” instructions are given because the teacher “manages” the visitor’s experiences after asking a question, and all those experiences are usually part of the answer to the question, whether the visitor understands them right away or not. With more than a single question in a visit, it becomes almost impossible to know which question is being answered symbolically or otherwise in the rest of the journey. BEN FRANKLIN To reiterate, the Westerners were told only how to seek their teachers, not who they were. This is part of the spiritual autonomy of shamanism: to find out for oneself through direct experience. In the following account, an American’s question was “How can I be happy?” To get to the Upper World, I went to the island of Maui where the Iao Needle rises up from a valley. I climbed to the top of it and let the mists lift me up through the layers of clouds [the barrier]. I saw some pastel colors in the distance and started flying towards them. There were all these pastel-colored cubes floating around so I started to look for the one where my teacher might be. There was a lavender one that had a door in the corner, so I went through it. Inside there was an old man behind a white desk. I recognized him as Ben Franklin. He had the little fringe of shoulder-length white hair and the little spectacles. He was wearing robes, and I knew he was my teacher. We greeted each other very warmly. I asked him, “How can I be happy?” He immediately picked up the small white plastic spoon and started spoonfeeding me ice cream. It was all the flavors that I had never tried because I had not thought that I would like them. They were delicious! That was great, but it didn’t seem like enough, so I asked him for more help. He had me lie down in a giant waffle iron and he closed it on top of me. I stood up inside it. He opened it and I stepped out. I left behind in the waffle iron this hard shell of who I had thought I was, like all the limitations that I had placed on myself. He picked up the shell, dropped it into a tank of water, and it dissolved. Then he playfully flicked some of the solution onto my face and dumped the rest down through the clouds to become rain. I felt there was a burden lifted from my shoulders. I don’t even remember the rest of my journey.5 This visitor asked the question, “How can I be happy?” and was immediately fed delicious ice cream by the teacher. The very first thing a teacher says or does is typically the core of the answer to the question, even if the visitor does not realize it. In this case, she was given all the flavors she had not tried, because she had not thought she would like them. She did not understand that she had been given a metaphorical answer, so she asked for more help. Now, to supplement the answer, the teacher gave her a treatment, a healing to remove “all the limitations” she had placed on herself. She felt a heavy burden lifted from her shoulders. It occurs frequently that the teacher not only gives an answer but provides a healing, as noted before. Also to be noted is the fact that the visitor reported no pain when the waffle iron was closed down on her. It was not because of a lack of senses (she tasted the ice cream), but because we have never found pain or suffering in the Upper World. A distinctive feature of our Middle World is the near-certainty of experiencing pain, to greater or lesser degrees. TRUMPETS AND CHRIST This visitor’s point of departure was Mt. Kilimanjaro in Tanzania, which he had once climbed in ordinary reality. His question was: “What can I do to help?” As I jumped upwards, I passed through a layer of clouds [the barrier] and immediately saw a black bird that took me to the second level through a thin film of clouds. I found myself in a world of whirlwind clouds, one of which enveloped me and took me up to the third level through a large hole in a thin cloud layer. This level was filled with pastel colors, and I experienced a feeling of warmth and calmness about me. I looked around for my teacher but found no one. Upon realizing that I needed to go to another level, I spotted an opening in the cloudy sky. A lightning bolt opened up the space and became a conduit for my transport to the fourth level. I immediately found myself in front of two immense, open, golden gates. I started walking through them. The feeling I experienced was that I was entering an ancient Egyptian palace. There were beautiful fountains and lots of children playing around in the water. I entered a large room filled with dignitaries, apparently waiting in anticipation for someone special to arrive. I proceeded to the center of the room and sat crosslegged and waited with everybody else. In front of me were two thrones. My immediate thought was, “Oh my, I will have two teachers, a male and a female!” I heard the sound of trumpets. A figure clad in a simple white robe came out from the right side of the stage. To my surprise he came toward me, and went around me in a clockwise direction, and then stopped in front of me. I stood up and recognized the person of Christ. I asked him if he was my teacher. Without uttering a sound he gave me a broad, warm smile, and I knew indeed it was he. I then asked him my question, “What can I do to help?” He raised up his left hand with the open palm facing me in the sign of peace.To my amazement, the next thing I knew I was going upwards through his open palm to the fifth heaven, and I found myself standing next to him at the end of our galaxy, staring at the stars. I was in awe, but somehow it felt very natural being there. Then we both became stars and started playing around the other stars, in complete abandonment. Then we came back to the large room. I thanked him for the sign and said that I hoped to see him soon.6 This journeyer commented afterward: “Although I grew up as a Greek Orthodox Christian, I was really stunned to see that Christ was my teacher, because I had rebelled against Church authoritarianism and dogma. I had avoided participating in mainstream religious practices for a very long time.” His question had been, “What can I do to help?” We cannot speak for him, for he is the only person qualified to interpret an answer from his teacher, an answer that was perfectly designed for him. If this visitor is uncertain about his interpretation of the answer, he can make more visits to the teacher for elaborative information. To help you understand how a teacher may answer, here is one possible interpretation: Jesus’s answer could be, “You can help by being in peace” (the sign of his palm) and “by going through me” (as the visitor passed involuntarily through his hand), and also, “I am with you wherever you are” (as he joined the visitor at the end of our galaxy). To summarize this possible answer: “You can help by being in peace through me, for I am with you always.” I have just speculated on the possible meanings of the teacher’s actions only to illustrate how to divine symbolic answers. In this visit the journeyer, like an indigenous shaman, kept track of the number of levels as he ascended to reach a palacelike structure where he found the teacher. Now that he knows the teacher’s level, he will be able to return again to learn more. He also heard the sound of trumpets. This is a good sign of progress, for he is no longer limited to his visual senses in experiencing the Upper World. MERLIN Sometimes one gets involved in a two-way conversation with a helping spirit. The next example is a good illustration of a dialogue with a teacher following a divination question. As I said before, normally one tries not to ask more than one question during a single visit in order to avoid confusion about which symbolic response is an answer to which question. In this case, however, the journeyer’s numerous secondary questions all fit into the framework of the larger one that he asked, which was: “How can I release my held feelings into a life of peace?” Since he did not encounter symbolic communications after the dialogue, confusion did not occur. I started at Old Faithful geyser in Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming. Flying up the spouting water, I looked down at the crowd of spectators. They couldn’t see me. I flew south toward the Grand Tetons. When I reached the highest and most central peak of this range, I flew straight up through an opening in a cellophane-like membrane [the barrier]. I looked around and at first saw only sky. Then I saw an old hermit with long gray hair and a beard standing in front of a cave. There were trees outside the cave, and an owl was perched in one of these. I received the thought that this hermit was Merlin, but at the same time I felt very skeptical because I long ago dismissed the belief in God being an old gray-haired, bearded man who lives in the sky: Yet I was surprised that this image would appear to me, since I have not read or thought much about Merlin. While I was pondering all of this, I repeatedly asked him, “Are you my teacher?” He was not at all welcoming. In fact, he seemed annoyed with me. Anyway, I followed him into his cave, where he busied himself with the fire. I decided to journey onward and rose upward on a spark through the hole in the cave ceiling. I went through another cellophane-like membrane to another level. There was a tropical landscape over to my right. I walked over and, finding no one, I decided to rise to yet another Upper World level. There was the most radiant, full rainbow I have ever seen, and I rode it upward on my stomach, headfirst to its crest. From there I ascended through another transparent membrane and came out onto the third level. The moon was very close. I could see both its curve and the texture of its mountainous surface. The rock was black and yet looked white, being bathed in the light of our sun. Finding no one, I decided to return to Merlin and again ask my question.I journeyed downward through the chimney hole of the cave and landed on my feet beside him. Again I asked, “Are you my teacher?” He seemed annoyed at my skepticism and said, “Yes, I told you before that I am.” I asked him my question, “How can I release held feelings into a life of peace?”He answered, “Stop doubting. Stop so much questioning.” I decided to explore this further. I asked him, “How can I release my anger?”He said, “Stop doubting your experience.” I asked him, “How do I release sadness?” He said, “You were there. Remember. Experience your experience.” Next I asked him, “How can I release experiences of held terror?” He said, “You were there. Experience your experience. You will release all that is not you.” Lastly I asked him, “How can I release the fullness of love?” He answered, “Release the first three—anger, sadness, and terror—and all else is love.” At that point the return drumming began and I returned downward through the barrier, descending to the base of Old Faithful again in the Middle World.7 JESUS CHRIST Ascending to the Upper World, one can interact directly with gods and goddesses that others only learn about through stories. This visitor did not know in advance that a divine figure would be her teacher, and she had prepared this worldly question: “What am I going to do as the next step in my moneymaking career?” This is probably not a question that many would think of as appropriate to ask Jesus, but he, as a spirit teacher, had the choice of making himself available. As she found out, he was not only available, but he also provided a symbolic answer. Shamans have learned from firsthand experience that the teachers in the Upper World do not mind being “bothered.” Indeed, they are too powerful to be capable of being “bothered.” Shamans also know that any question that is important to them will normally be responded to by the teacher. As the drumming began I found myself running up a familiar mountain path that I know in ordinary reality. I continued running as my feet lifted off the ground, running through the sky, running up a type of ladder. Higher and higher I ran, up into the clouds, passing the barrier to the Upper World. I saw a pasture with a shepherd, but he was not my teacher. I climbed onto the back of a large black bird I met and flew higher still with him. We flew through a waterfall into a meadow. Jesus Christ came walking across the meadow to greet me; he indicated that he was my teacher.Jesus was playing with a red apple that he held in his hands. I began to bow before him, to sit at his feet, but he told me to stop, that I was as much a teacher as he. I asked him my question, “What am I going to do as the next step in my moneymaking career?” He answered, “Trust.” I wondered what he was doing with this apple in his hands, if he was going to eat it or what. He surrounded my body with a bubble of soft green light, a type of healing, a protective shield, that washed over me. The sky began to become a wash of brilliant colors: pinks, blues, greens. I looked deeply into his eyes, and my heart sang with joy. It was so intense a feeling that I began to cry. He began to float up into the sky, again telling me to trust, as he disappeared. In the sky I saw an image of a ram’s head, then images of knights riding across the sky. A wave of golden color began to flow across the meadow, changing all the grass to gold. As it reached me I flew with it, changing everything I flew over to a beautiful gold color. Then I sat again in the meadow, playing with sending bursts of color out into the sky until it was time to return.8 Afterward she said: “It was not until I was sharing the journey with my partner that the significance of the apple made sense. I am a computer consultant and have a Macintosh computer—made by Apple! It seems clear that whatever business I undertake will produce money—gold. I still do not understand the brilliant colors or the images in the sky.” The above account is an example of how shamanic journeying is useful even in the computer age. It also exemplifies the combination of joy and tears that typifies ecstatic spiritual union, an important subject we will explore further in Chapter 11. As regards the question lingering in the student’s mind concerning the “brilliant colors” and “images in the sky,” she can ask about that in future journeys to her teacher. One possibility, and it is only that, is that she will use color with her Macintosh as the “next step” in her moneymaking career. However, we should keep in mind that only she is qualified to interpret her journey. Another point needs to be noted: her question was somewhat ambiguous. Did she really want to know only what will happen? In other words, was she being completely fatalistic? Note also that asking “will” questions involves prophecy, a very advanced and complex form of divination, something for which she was not prepared. Or did she really intend to ask for advice to improve her situation? If so, it would have been better for her to ask, “What should I do …?” In divination, it is important to formulate a question very carefully. (By the way, asking “should” questions is perfectly permissible in shamanic divination; shamanism is a different system from psychotherapy.) Be aware that no matter what a spirit teacher says you “should” do, view the teacher as a friend, not a dictator. If after doing divination, someone justifies an action by declaring, “the spirits told me” to do so.and-so, it is a serious mistake. The person does not yet understand that he or she is in an equal relationship with the helping spirits and commits a serious error in abdicating responsibility for consequent actions in ordinary reality. The successful shaman balances information from both realities. Shamanism is a system or method for regaining your own spiritual authority, not giving it up, even to spirits. A FEMALE TEACHER ASSISTED BY A POLAR BEAR The next example of a first visit involves the practical question, “Where should I vacation this winter?” The question may seem mundane, but it is similar in content to the question, “Where shall we have the summer camp?” that might be asked by a Siberian shaman herding reindeer. The account is in the present tense because the journeyer is using the simultaneous-narration method (which involves a tape recorder or other electronic recording method; for information on this, see Appendix A, this page). I’m climbing the rainbow. Below me it is smooth, like silk. I feel a power pulling me up. Below me I see the hills, and a road. I’m climbing up the rainbow. Above me I see clouds. They are white, gray, and fluffy. I reach the top of the rainbow. I step onto a cloud [the barrier]. I’m surprised that it holds my weight. I walk along the clouds, among the clouds. An eagle flies to me. I ask him, “Where am I?” He says, “You are in the Upper World.” I ask the eagle if my teacher is in the Upper World. He says, “Yes, she is here.” The eagle walks with me, perched on my shoulder. We find the teacher. She is walking along the clouds, her long black hair glistening in the sun, which is high above us. She talks to the eagle in a strange language that I do not understand. She’s still walking along the clouds. The eagle and I follow her. She asks if I have a question for her. I ask her, “Where should I vacation this winter? I have been wondering whether to go to Florida this winter or go skiing.” She says she will show me, saying, “Now we must go up to the next level. It’s easy, all you have to do is let go, and the power will pull us up.”We let go. I feel myself flying. I feel a breeze. It’s warm. We go up to the next level. It is a tundra filled with snow. There are little trees like sticks, with no leaves, and bushes scattered along the tundra. I feel the snow under my feet. It is very cold. We walk along the tundra. Above us there is another flock of birds flying in a V. They are Canadian geese. They fly off. I’m walking in the snow. I’m walking. I am cold. A polar bear comes near us. He is growling. He is all white. He says, “I am the Spirit of the North.” I am cold. As he comes near me, I shriek. I’m scared. The teacher says, “It will not harm us.” My teacher talks to it in the strange language I do not understand. I ask the teacher, “What did it say?” She says, “It said you must seek the warmth because that is your nature.” We go up to the next level. Again, a force pulls us up. I am being pulled up. The eagle is still perched on my shoulder. The next level is a forest. We are walking along the forest floor. There is moss under my feet. It feels spongy and warm. The sun is peeking through the clouds. We walk through the forest. We come to a stump. My teacher says to me, “See how this tree has fallen down. There is just a stump left. This is what happens when things grow in the wrong place. There was not enough light here and not enough warmth, so the tree fell down. Now we must go up to the next level.” Again, I feel a power pulling me up. The next level is a field. There are many flowers in the field. The flowers are blue and red. They are very cheerful. The sun is shining above us. It feels warm. My teacher says, “This is what you need. You need the warmth of your grandparents in Florida. You need the warmth of the sunshine in Florida.” Now my teacher says, “It’s time to leave.” I feel the power pulling us down. We go down through the forest, down through the tundra, down through the clouds, along the rainbow again. I’m sliding down the rainbow. It’s smooth beneath me. I reach the ground.9 This account illustrates a clear question and a clear answer. The person seeking help speaks of feeling the breeze and cold, and of feeling scared. These are all good signs that she is truly entering nonordinary reality and is not limited to only visualizing an experience. She also finds out that her fears are unwarranted—an opportunity for her to start discovering that the Upper World is a safe place. She is assisted by a polar bear and an eagle, indications that she has power animals available to support her. Her teacher speaks with the eagle and the polar bear in a strange language. Unknown to this journeyer, “unintelligible” languages for communication with animal spirits were once well known by indigenous shamans. The “secret shamanic tongue,” as Eliade puts it, was often used to communicate with the animal spirits, as among Eskimoan groups, or as among the Tungus of Siberia, who talked with all of nature.10 We have already seen in Chapter 2 how even Westerners involved with shamanism learn new languages from human spirits, as in my own case and that of Amanda Foulger. Once the teacher is involved, anything that happens during the journey is either part of the answer or a “gift” from the teacher about something the visitor needs. The visitor can seek more information in future visits to the teacher. THE TEACHER IS THE SPIRIT OF A STILL-LIVING PERSON Teachers occasionally may be persons still alive here in ordinary reality, and who may have admitted to being one’s teacher when encountered in the Upper World. These often are the spirits of shamans or other highly spiritual persons traversing these realms. Such a living person is almost never conscious of that kind of heavenly encounter. This perhaps is just as well. Otherwise, the living person might make the mistake of acquiring feelings of unjustified self-importance that would cause his or her compassionate spirits to leave in disappointment. The disappointment would be over the failure of the person to recognize that the spirit is not the same as the whole person back here in the Middle World. A teacher sometimes is an unidentifiable person in ordinary reality. This seems to make little difference in the quality of the teacher’s answers, and it may seem presumptuous to ask his or her name. Yet the teacher’s identity may be discovered unexpectedly. Following is such an account. For years one of my main teachers had been an old man in the Upper World who inhabited a cabin in an unknown countryside. Then one day, in ordinary reality, while driving along a road in California, I came to a beautiful canyon and on impulse stopped there. An inviting path led up the canyon and I decided to follow it. Much to my surprise, I arrived at a cabin almost identical to the Upper World one of my spirit teacher. There was even a similar fence around it. I could not resist knocking on the door. A young man appeared. I explained that the cabin reminded me of one I had known elsewhere. He graciously invited me in. I entered, and in the dim light saw an elderly man half-reclining on a couch. He turned his head toward me and smiled. It was a wonderful shock. I recognized him as being my teacher in the Upper World or, rather, being an aging ordinary-reality version of my teacher in the Upper World. We began talking, and it was like a meeting of old friends, although he could only talk haltingly. He had been suffering from an incurable illness for a long time, an illness that had forced him to stop his work as a landscape painter. In fact, he had been suffering from it approximately the same number of years I had known my teacher in the Upper World. I did not tell him about my teacher, but on some level he seemed to know something. He said that I seemed familiar to him, and he gave me a print of one of his paintings haltingly inscribed, “To my Old Friend.” He died about two years later, but now I know his name, and I can still visit him.11 ADDITIONAL OBSERVATIONS Two of the notable features of power animals is that they are able to transcend all three worlds, and they can easily be called by the shaman. In contrast, the teachers normally reside in the Upper and Lower Worlds and are visited by the shaman. Nonetheless, there are occasions with the help of shamans that the teachers may come to the Middle World, such as when merged with shamans to do healing work, or alternatively to do mediumistic work answering questions, as in Korea. The teachers also may choose to take on animal forms on certain occasions. A skeptic might naturally suggest that such a “perfect” teacher is simply a psychological projection of the visitor. The shaman’s way is not to argue such points but simply to invite skeptics to conduct their own personal experiments and arrive at their conclusions empirically. (To begin to do this, the reader can consult Appendix A.) In this connection, one can seek an answer from a teacher for a complete stranger. Usually the answer is so accurate that both the stranger and the diviner are surprised.For one person’s shamanic journey experiences over ten years, see Sandra Harner’s Ema’s Odyssey, to be published by North Atlantic Books in January 2014. METAPHORICAL COMMUNICATIONS The beings in the heavens of the Upper World frequently provide information in the form of metaphor. Why? This is, of course, similar to the kind of mystery that many psychologists, such as Freud and Jung, have attempted to penetrate by studying dreams. From a shamanic viewpoint, metaphor is a tool used by the spirits to provide messages in a manner deeper than literal communication. Metaphorical communication, when deciphered by the shaman, indeed contains the information requested, but it also goes beyond the literal to teach profound knowledge. One frequent teaching that the spirits give us through metaphor is simply this: the unity of all things. By repeatedly showing how things we ordinarily consider to be different are really the same, the powers are subtly educating us spiritually. Another advantage of metaphorical communication is that it forces the visitor to try to comprehend the message and, as a consequence, the effort of decipherment can engender a revelation with deeper and longer-lasting emotional impact than a literal communication. Metaphorical communication can also teach the value of self-sacrifice in the quest for spiritual knowledge, for one achieves such understanding through the personal effort of decipherment. The shamans’ self-sacrifice in vision and power quests, in efforts on behalf of others, and in the personal effort of decoding symbolic or metaphorical communications from the spirits, are all part of the same continuum of ever-deeper understanding and learning. Shamans use metaphor throughout their work, including in their visualizations of all things. Shamans see with the heart, not just the “strong” or “third” eye, and the heart is awakened by healing metaphors and symbolic communication. The language in shamans’ songs is consequently filled with metaphor, and the use of song reinforces the consciousness of unity. Healings most commonly occur when this unity is experienced. 10 Teachers—Compassionate Spirits Who Heal The spirit teachers, as compassionate beings of power, are available to help visitors who request personal healings. When the teachers do such healings, they commonly enact the methods used in the form of a demonstration. The reason is simple: they are not only healing visitors, they are teaching methods for them to take home. This enables shamanic healing knowledge to be revived through journeying and ascension even when a culture or group of people has otherwise lost its shamans and shamanic knowledge. Visitors to the teachers can ask for health advice. Sometimes advice is all they ask, but they receive an unexpected healing. Similarly, a person requesting a healing may receive that as well as supplementary information to help their health condition. Visitors treated by a teacher in the Upper World are frequently surprised to have lost their symptoms (such as a chronic backache) immediately upon their return to the Middle World. Other ailments may take longer to clear, and follow-up visits to the teacher are advisable to help make the relief permanent or to effect a cure. This is not too different from modern medicine—one may have to take multiple doses of a prescribed remedy or get repeated bodywork treatments. In shamanic treatment, two or three consecutive evenings of work are frequently necessary if the problem is serious. Many Westerners prefer doing it once a week. Even with a successful outcome, a shamanically treated health problem does not necessarily go away instantly. One of the finest North American tribal shamans I have known, a famous healer on the Northwest Coast, used to tell his patients after doing a session, “This is not a miracle cure. It takes two days!” He also believed in supplementary treatment by Western physicians and hospitals, which he considered to be “alternative medicine.” Indeed, shamanic healing work is the spiritual part of a holistic approach to health, together with the practical way in which almost all adults in indigenous societies know the basic local plant remedies. Shamanism is not attempting to replace any other system of healing or medicine, but rather to supplement it on a spiritual level. Physicians and other health care professionals should feel no threat from shamanism and instead be glad that they and their patients have spiritual support. They are invited to read Appendix D, “Core Shamanism and Healing: Information for Physicians and Health Professionals.” The powers of nonordinary reality frequently reveal to shamans their patients’ illnesses in metaphorical or symbolic form. Shamans seeking information on the presence or absence of illness in a patient often look for something alarming or disagreeable with shamanic “X-ray” visualization (which can be taught) in order to see if there is something locally wrong with the patient. If shamans are only shown sweetness and light, or beautiful flowers, such images will not help them find an illness or serious problem to be treated. This is elaborated upon in The Way of the Shaman.1 Shamanic visualization of illness is intended to perceive its nonordinary aspect, which usually shows as a spirit metaphor of its ordinary-reality appearance. These metaphors are powerful, and in recent years many nonshamans have begun to rediscover the usefulness of metaphor in visualization exercises to fight cancer and other illnesses.2 “ONE OF THE MOST FREEING EXPERIENCES OF MY LIFE” This is a first-person account from a Westerner who first establishes that the being he meets is his teacher before making his healing request. This is the recommended procedure when asking for advice of any kind, as well as requesting a healing, since in a single ascension one may encounter various impressive deities or historical figures who are not actually one’s teacher. Following is his report. My question was, “Will you please heal my soul of its abandonment issue?” I entered the upper realms from a mountaintop in Switzerland. There was much fog all about. I felt I was flying over mountains of Tibet. I could see the mountains through a clearing in the clouds. Then I seemed to break through a kind of membrane. There, to my amazement, I met Buddha. I asked him if he was my teacher. He smiled, closed his eyes, and handed me a lotus. I asked him to please heal my abandonment issue. He put the lotus within my chest. It was connected by the stem to him. He sucked out smoke from my chest and cleaned the cavity with the lotus. Then he put bundles of lotuses in the chest cavity and closed it up with white paper. He placed a gold crown on my head as he held my shoulders and looked into my eyes. He put a lotus over my left ear and had me sit down. There were rose petals falling all around. Two young female bodhisattvas put a robe of multicolors over my shoulders and more flowers in my hair. Then I became a lotus of light. I felt the essence of white and orange light. I saw an orange sphere. Buddha said, “This is your initiation.” I was one with the sphere. I was at peace and stayed there until time to come back. When I was to come back, I thanked Buddha by giving him the lotus back. But I changed my mind and decided to give him my heart instead. Upon arrival back in ordinary reality, I felt the lotus was still connected to me by way of the heart cavity with the lotus inside and connected to Buddha by the stem.3 Afterward, the student talked about the experience: “Following the journey, we were asked to relate our experience to someone in the room. I was at first hesitant due to my fear of sounding pretentious in meeting such a great being. However, I soon discovered that the lady next to me had met Christ, and another friend of mine in the room had met Mohammed. “This confirmed for me that my experience was one of many spectacular and beautiful experiences, and there is no reason to limit ourselves from going to the most extraordinary places and meeting the wisest of beings in order to be blessed with their help and guidance. It was one of the most freeing and uplifting experiences of my life.” A HEALING BY HIPPOCRATES I made my ascent upward on a spiral of smoke from a campfire in a familiar place that is special to me. My power animal accompanied me to the membrane. I went through the membrane and saw no one. The landscape was sparkling. It looked like diamonds and crystals with sunlight shining on them. I felt a light wind and was then caught up in a whirlwind and went up to another level. Saw no one. More wind came and I spiraled to another level. I heard music, singing and laughter. I could see a white marble temple. It looked like the Greek Parthenon. I climbed the marble stairs, and when I got to the top I could see in the large, open center people feasting. I was motioned to come to the head table by a man dressed in a long flowing robe. I approached and asked, “Are you my teacher?” “Yes,” he answered. I asked his name and was told it was Hippocrates, the Father of Medicine. I asked, “What can I do to heal this pain in my lower back and abdomen?” He held out a staff with a snake entwined on it. I was told to take hold of the staff. As I did, the snake began to move. It crawled up my arm and down my back and came around my waist and coiled around my abdomen. I could feel the pain leaving my body as the snake crawled on it. Then I saw a small fish swimming by and then a large school of fish swam by. I saw a cup filled with tea, bowls of rice, and grapes. I was told by my teacher that grapes would help keep me strong and well physically. I was to use all of the grape plant and fruit and use it daily. The drum called me back. The pain did not return, and I am grateful for the healing. I have studied the grape plant and fruit and have found them to have strong antioxidants that protect the body. I have increased my intake of rice and fish, and I have more energy.4 ASKING MERLIN FOR HELP WITH ASTHMA In this visit the Westerner, who suffered from asthma, simply asked the teacher to be shown “the way” to a healing. Probably it would have been even better to ask directly for a healing, but she got results. I climbed up a special tree that was at a campsite in northern New Mexico where recently I had been. An eagle came by and said that even though it was not my power animal, it would take me to where I needed to go. We flew upward through the clouds, where it then left me. I flew farther up toward a bright star. The pressure on my chest and the cold of the thin air left me feeling breathless. I flew through the star and came to a land of bright lights and shimmering landscapes. I then called for my teacher to present him-or herself. Out of the air emerged Merlin. He said to follow him and then he took me into a crystal cave. I asked him to show me the way to my healing. He sat me down in a chair in the center of the room next to a table on which sat a box. He opened the box. Inside was a huge hot quartz crystal. The room was very cool, but there was an incredible heat emanating from the stone. He took the crystal out and said, “This is what was taken from you so many years ago: the heat of your passion; the light of your power. It is time to return it. The hot crystal will melt the icicles of fear and grief of the loss that you hold in your chest.” He placed it into my chest. I immediately felt the heat, and my chest cleared. I asked if there was anything that I should know. He said, “You are of the fairy folk from so long ago, gentle and fair, but also seeking vengeance when wronged. Your gift and power were stolen so long ago, and it is time to return them.” I told him I had missed him. He said, “I have never been away, but now I will be here for you to see and hear. I will whisper in your right ear and guide you in the ways of magic, and of the plant and earth spirits, so that you will remember once again. I will be here to help you once more. My love and my strength will go with you.” We held each other for a moment, and I was flooded with memories of my love for this man, my first true teacher. Then we were called back.5 She discovered her teacher to be Merlin. She described her health problem, and he produced a hot quartz crystal. (She was not aware that indigenous shamans know that quartz crystals become hot when empowered.) He placed it on her chest and then gave this empowered crystal to her to keep. Among the Huichol people of Mexico, a shaman’s soul may return in the form of a quartz crystal.6 Immediately after returning from the Upper World the journeyer commented: “I had had asthma earlier today while lying on the cold floor during the first two journeys. Upon returning from this journey, my chest feels much more open and all my asthma is gone.” Months later the same woman commented that prior to this journey her asthma had ranged from moderate to life-threatening. “Since the journey,” she reported, “my asthma has been improved overall. My chest was at its clearest immediately after the journey; since I’ve been home it has come and gone but has never again been as severe [as in the past].… I do feel there is more journey work to do that will clear it entirely.” She was probably right, for in the case of serious health problems, shamanic healing work should usually be repeated until a cure is complete, as mentioned before. ASKING TO PREVENT THE RETURN OF CANCER This ascension to an unidentified teacher was experienced by a woman suffering from uterine cancer (endometrial sarcoma) that had been arrested some years earlier. Fearful that the cancer might resume growing again, she asks her teacher to help prevent the disease from returning. She could have asked the teacher not just “to help prevent the disease from returning,” but “to prevent it from returning.” That would have been an even stronger request. In response, the teacher provides emotionally charged, multifaceted, classic shamanic healing procedures, including a dismemberment (see Chapter 11), the extraction of an illness from her heart, and the transmission of healing energy or power. Her journey includes other features common in near-death experiences, such as encountering a bright light and a tunnel. She also experiences spinning, sometimes known as the “merry-go-round effect” in journey experiences. She finds herself connected in a circle, sharing energy or power with all present, including animals. This awareness of unity with the animals and all things is a common theme in shamanism. As Westerners do shamanic journeying, they spontaneously become more aware of this sacred connectedness. The journeyer herself exhibits good shamanic potential, for she not only sees while journeying but also is starting to experience with other senses, such as when she smells the flower. The journeyer used the simultaneous-narration technique (see Appendix A, this page) and thus was able to describe her experiences as they occurred. I am journeying to ask my teacher to help prevent the disease from coming back. I am before the fireplace. It’s twirling. I go up through the fireplace. To the sky. I am twirling. Spinning up through the sky. I break through a barrier, and I go up toward the clouds. I come out on the land surface. My teacher is there. “Help prevent the disease from coming back,” I say. He picks me up in his arms. We fly up to another level. We keep flying up. We go through another barrier. We go up through another one. We keep going up. Really fast. My body starts getting smaller and smaller. It is really small like a skin. I’m dissolving into nothing. It’s dissolving as we go up. I can only see my cells—they’re clean—and my eyes, and my cells. Farther and farther, I’m disintegrating. Now I’m just energy. My right half still has skin. But the rest of me is just energy. But my teacher is still holding me. We go farther and farther. We keep going through levels and levels. There is golden light. My leg, there’s skin, and there’s a dark area on my leg. It seems to be bleeding. Blood is pouring out through the hole in my leg. It is pouring out and the blood is dissolving. I keep flying and I feel really warm, really hot except for my left leg. It just keeps bleeding. Blood is pouring out. Blood and globs of things. Yet I am not whole. I am just energy. I keep going. It is getting hotter. Really, really hot. Now a disc is on me. A round disc. I am still energy. It’s being put over my head, through my body, and around my legs. It has stopped where the skin is on my right leg and calf. It sits there. I see the leg and the foot floating off to my right. It has separated from me. It is suspended in the air. Some hands are now around the leg. These hands are rolling off the skin, from one end to the other. Now they are pulling the skin off. It looks like a hide. The leg is energy. They are pulling the skin off. There’s a hole in the leg. There is a hole in the energy. The hands take the hide and they put it into the hole. It’s black inside. My teacher is calling me over to look into the hole. There are stars in the hole. He wants me to go through this hole. He takes my hand. And we go through the hole. It is very dark. There are many, many lights. Now there’s a huge eagle. It is huge, as big as the Empire State Building. He places me onto the chest of the eagle. I am lying there in the warmth of the feathers. It’s just holding me. My teacher gets onto the bird. We start flying up, higher and higher, toward this very bright light. We are going into the light. The light opens. We’re flying into it, into another dimension. A deeper space, almost like a tunnel. Going up. Very far away. I feel my power animal. The deer [power animal] is with me. We are flying up higher and higher. I feel like I am whole, but I still don’t have the lower part of my leg. It’s gone. Now my other leg is disappearing. My thighs are disappearing. I have no legs. I keep going. Now I have no arms. My heart … my heart is beating. It is red, and it is beating. There is nothing around it. It is just the heart. Now the hole drops me into the vessel of the heart. It is really dark, very dark. It is almost hard to breathe. It is dark. I feel the pulse, can feel my heart. I feel my heart beating. Very strong. Very loud. Very deep. Very dark. It is too dark. So empty. Now I feel arms, and legs, coming out into the light of the heart. And I feel the heart. I can feel my arms. And the heart. It is very strong. Now the heart is dissolving the skin back onto my body. It is going on, shrinking onto me. Now there is a giraffe [probably a power animal since it is helping her] and I am on it. We start floating. I feel good. We run with me on his back. We start coming down. We are coming down. Farther down the stairs. Farther down. Down. The giraffe drops me off in this place where there is water, a pool. My heart feels so big—it almost feels too big for my body. I go into the pool. As I go into the water my body starts to expand. It is expanding to meet the size of my heart. It meets the size of my heart. I am getting out of the water. I am walking down. I see my teacher. He hands me a flower, a gardenia. I can smell it. Now he is giving me fruit that looks like cranberries, and some almonds. I eat. As I eat, I again feel warmth inside. I feel my legs. I feel energy going down my legs. My teacher is placing me on top of a piece of stone, and burning incense or sage on the four corners of the stone. There are bracelets around my legs, my ankles. There is a band around my head. He is opening my chest with a knife and pulling my heart out. He pulls out of my heart a huge creature—some black thing. It’s a spider. He pours fluid into the heart. He places my heart back into my chest, and closes up my chest. The thing that he has pulled out of my body is walking away. It is really ugly. It is leaving. It is going away into a cave. Now my skin is brown, and my body is better. But my leg is still hot. My teacher is now cutting with the knife and takes my leg off. I’m bleeding there. He is placing this leaf over the place where he cut my leg off. Now my leg is growing back, growing out from my body. It feels normal now. I am still lying here. Animals and people with headdresses have arrived. The giraffe has returned. There are deer, bear. There is someone with a white headdress. It’s my teacher. There is Turtle. Rabbits. Butterflies. They all stand around in a circle. Beams of light form a circle and are entering into me through my navel, spreading through me to all the animals and the people in the circle. The energy of the circle is spinning, forming a cone shape of energy. It is like a tent, but a tent of light. We are spinning. I am in the center of this bright light. Spinning. It is time to return. I thank everyone—all the animals. My teacher takes me and we start going back. He again is holding me and takes me down through the levels. Down, down, down. Past the eagle. Down. We come to the first level. I thank him. Now I start to go down through the sky. And down, through the chimney. And onto the floor. I am back. I am still spinning. It was an amazing healing. Especially with my heart. Something was really removed from my heart, and I experienced my own heart. Everywhere I went something was done to take care of me.7 The removal of an illness seen as an ugly entity (here the spider) is a classic form of shamanic diagnosis and intrusion extraction that regularly occurs whether or not the visitors to the teachers have ever heard of it. The spirits themselves are perennial teachers of shamanic methods, such as extraction. Spiritual extraction is used to remove illness or pain from a localized part of the patient such as (in this case) the person’s heart, as explained in The Way of the Shaman.8 With regard to extracting spiders and hearts, keep in mind that we are working in nonordinary reality, and these are spider and heart spirits. Likewise, the teachings being illustrated here are for use in shamanic healing, not for use in ordinary reality! Due to a lack of resources to do follow-up studies in this and the vast majority of cases, we unfortunately do not know if she was cured of her cancer. REQUESTING ALLEVIATION OF A BACKACHE FROM A DECEASED INDIAN GURU Working with an Upper World teacher who has previously been a spiritual teacher in ordinary reality is a widespread shamanic practice, reminding us how the barrier between the dead and living is not particularly relevant to the shaman. In this journey, a woman asks that her backache be cured by her Upper World teacher, a famous deceased yogi. She takes with her a nonordinary opal that he had previously given to her there. A classic shamanic theme appearing in her journey, something of which she had never heard, is the crossing of a thin bridge over a dangerous chasm to reach a teacher, deity, deceased person, or another realm. The bridge, she notes, is no wider than a thread. The Altaic shamans of Siberia similarly describe the bridge as having “the breadth of a hair,”9 and the thread across a chasm is known to some indigenous shamans elsewhere. She is terrified as she crosses it, which is a good sign, for her fear indicates that she is really in nonordinary reality and is taking it seriously. Now, her journey: My jaguar took me to the Upper World and through the membrane. He took me up a very rocky ledge. I could hear the stones tumbling down. He took me to a place where there is a long thread and left me there. I had to walk over this thread, which scared me to death. I very carefully put one foot in front of the other because I’m terrified of heights, but I knew I had to go alone. I’ve done it twice before. It’s like being on this thread with clouds going over this huge chasm. It really scared me and I was breathless and afraid to look down, but I went. I got across. There’s a bush there that I parted and walked through. It’s the side of a mountain in the Himalayas. I walked up some steps and entered a cave there where he lives. My teacher is an Indian guru whom I know of historically. I’m a person who never has pain anywhere, but sitting here these last days I have had this terrific pain in my back. I told my teacher, “I want this pain to leave because it really hurts and I’m not used to it.” He said, “Let’s sit and meditate. Do you have your opal?” I said, “Yes.” He put it in my left hand and sat in the lotus position. I did the same. I meditated with my yogi and then after a short period of meditation he directed me to go outside the cave where there was a little stream. I walked in that stream and came to a great pool of water. I got in and immersed myself. It turned into—it was really dark—a very narrow opening. I went into that and then I realized I was in my spinal column. I could see the vertebrae as I went down to the lower back area where the pain is. I heard a sound like electricity crackling, and it went around my body counterclockwise. Then the call-back drumming began. I came up my spinal column, back up to the cave; I thanked the yogi, and I walked across the bridge. My panther was there waiting for me. We came back and he brought me through the membrane and back here. And now the pain’s really gone.10 REQUESTING A HEALING AND PASSING THROUGH AN INTERWORLD TO A GOLDEN CITY My journey to the Upper World was very emotional and resulted in much heart healing. It was a journey about relationships with [deceased] people, and I went seeking healing. I had to go to the second level to find light and people. The first level was murky and scary, and I required the help of Whale throughout my first Upper World journey. When I broke through a bank of clouds, I saw a golden city, comprised of many different periods and styles of architecture. And the people walking the streets came from many different time periods. When I saw my mother, I started to cry. She had died in 1988, and I had not been able to tell her good-bye. She held me a long time and told me she loved me and that she was here for me, as were all the others who had gone before. Then I saw Jim Smith—he looked just as he had the last time I saw him: darkly handsome, just twenty-seven years old. Jim was the great love of my life, and he died in 1976. I asked him if he was my teacher, and he said he was. I told him I was requesting healing from my addictive behavior. He disappeared. I found myself walking beside a row of empty graves with blank tombstones heading them.I floated above the graves and was suddenly surrounded by spirits. They told me, “This is what you fear.” At that moment, I didn’t fear being with them; we were all one. Next, I was walking down a street, looking in windows of buildings as I passed. Inside each was a scene from my life when I had felt loved or sacred. At that point, the drums called me back. I had been crying for most of the journey, not from grief, but from gratitude for all the spirits I had with me.11 Note her remarks about how the first level was “murky and scary.” From extensive experience, I can say with confidence that this was not the first level, although it seemed like it to her. It was really what I call an “Interworld,” a zone at the edge of the Middle World and Upper World, as well as at the juncture of the Middle and Lower Worlds. The Interworld commonly does not appear unless the journeyer is preoccupied with recently deceased persons and death, as apparently was her case. When this was the preoccupation of the Westerners who participated in these exercises, they often were shown a “murky” area (just as she said) that is between worlds. It probably could also be called “limbo,” but that is a culturally laden word, and “Interworld” was not inspired by it. The Interworld appears to be a kind of way station for human spirits or souls who forlornly wait, like a mass of listless unemployed people in a colorless, dingy environment. When a shamanic journeyer passes through, these spirits may reach out their hands to plead for assistance to move beyond. They are needy, but they are powerless and harmless. Indeed, one of the classic tasks of the shaman cross-culturally is to act as a psychopomp, or conductor of souls, to help deceased persons move on to one of the worlds where they will be content. Even without a psychopomp, those in the Interworlds seem to move gradually to a better place. Incidentally, as I may have said before, in their drum journeys the Westerners never seemed to find anything beyond our Middle World that was a place of punishment or torment. In other words, they did not find anything resembling the stereotypic “hell” except for aspects of our own world! This account also illustrates how a teacher may “manage” an answer or a healing in a journey after disappearing. HEADACHE TREATMENT LESSONS WITH CROW MAN The following experience is a good example of “tough love” by a teacher to produce a successful healing and to educate the visitor at the same time. A student training to be a certified shamanic counselor wanted to know, “How can I stop these headaches?” He might have been better off if he had just asked, “Please cure my headaches.” But he did not; he asked how “I” could do it. Crow, a power animal of this student, leads him to Owl (a traditional Western sign of wisdom), who then metamorphoses into a man who is his teacher. Upper World teachers are compassionate, but they also may resort to tough love with humor, as in this case. They may also engage in extended dialogue, as in the following. The journey was recorded using the simultaneous-narration technique (information on this method is in Appendix A). I am overlooking the valley. It is a very clear day and I can see right to the coast. Owl is with me. And we take off. Fly circling around the mountaintop and on upward. Have a beautiful panorama coming up. We are up high enough now. We can see the islands, around the sea coast. In the other direction I can see up on into Quebec. New Brunswick. Getting higher and higher … just a broad expanse of a sheet of clouds now. We are going through it. Okay, we just made it through. The higher we get, the darker it seems to get. Air is getting very thin. Coming to another cloud bank. We go through it … Owl is just leaving me off along the top of this cloud bank. They are like concentric circles of light that we’re rushing through—like a tunnel again. Except it is not really … it doesn’t really have solid boundaries like a tunnel. It is just these circles. Different-colored light. Red, violet, green, white. And we are just zooming on through with clouds passing underneath us. And now we are coming to a misty area that is kind of … and passing through it. Flying pretty much horizontally. Okay, now we are coming out of the mist and there is a landscape underneath us of green rolling hills. And I look down on one of the hills and there is a structure that looks like three cones. There is a big cone in the center and a small cone on each side. And we go down and there is a stairway that leads up to the entrance of the center cone. And Owl says to go on up the stairs and knock at the door. And he says he will wait outside. So I go up and knock on the door. The doors open. And there is nobody there. Now there is a crow. There is a big black crow flying right in front of me. And he leaves me. He is flying right into the center of the building. And there is a little chamber right in the center. A little—like a cylinder. A cylindrical chamber that runs right up to the top of the cone. And there is a doorway there. And as he flies close to it, the door opens, and he goes in. And I follow him. And he sits down on a cushion and he turns into a man. He is a small man with light-brown skin. And he is now hanging up his shirt. He is wearing pants. Beside him there is a little pouch full of arrows. And he is just sitting there cross-legged. And he is—it looks like he is meditating. He is just sitting there quietly. And then he looks off and he beckons me to sit down across from him. This is really weird— what he says to me—he is saying, “I already know you. But it is not going to hurt you to go through this again.” He gives me a green arrow and a red arrow. And now he is giving me a feather. And he says to me, “You have got too much going on. You have got a hundred thoughts going in a hundred directions. You don’t know whether you are coming or you are going. I am going to give you this feather. And when you have got too much going on, I want you to take this feather and I want you to take it in your right hand, and I want you to hold it up all of a sudden, like raise it up at a right angle, and when you do that, all that nonsense is going to stop.” And he says go ahead and try it.I feel a little silly about it. But I go ahead and I take it and I hold it in my right hand, straight out and up. So here goes. I am turning it. Okay, I flick it up at a right angle to my arm. Just hold it there. And it feels like the drumming has slowed down. It feels like my thoughts have slowed down. It feels like everything is in slow motion. And he says to me, “Now, don’t you have something you want to talk to me about?” “Yes, I do. I have a question. I want to know how to stop these headaches. How can I stop these headaches?” And he says, “Do you have a headache?” And I say, “No, I don’t have a headache.” He says, “Well, what are you worried about?” And I say, “Well, I am worried about getting a headache.” And he says, “Well, why are you worried about getting a headache? You don’t have a headache now.” I say, “Yes, but I am pretty sure I am going to get a headache.” So he says, “Well, what makes you so sure you are going to get a headache?” I say, “I always get a headache.” He says, “You don’t have a headache now.” I say, “Yes, but I am going to get one.” He says, “How do you know that?” And I say, “I always do.” But he says, “You don’t have one now.” “So, okay, look, I don’t have one now. But I get these things like maybe once or twice a week. And they really get in the way of doing what I am trying to do.” This guy is just looking at me like I am a complete idiot. Like I am not making any sense at all. Okay, now he is looking at me in dead earnest and he says, “You know, I can see that these headaches are really important to you. They have become like a real companion.” So he continues, “I suppose if the headaches were to go away, you would feel lonesome. And you would start missing them. Probably after you had been without them for two or three weeks, you would start to dream about them. You would make a shamanic journey to the Upper World to ask, ‘Couldn’t I please have just one more headache? Just to say good-bye?’ ” “Yes, I really have unfinished business with that headache,” I say. “I never really separated from that headache properly.” And so he says, “I could see how you are really attached to that headache. If you would like, I can give you a headache so that you can begin to separate from it.” And with that, he reaches behind him and pulls a hammer out of a toolbox. And I say, “No, no, I don’t really want to deal with that.” And he says, “I really think you should, because you know it is not good to just go cold turkey with one of these things. You need to phase these headaches out gradually. You know, as long as you have been deriving such torture from having this relationship with this headache, it might be bad for you to just get rid of it and not have it anymore. You might be really uncomfortable and go through withdrawal and start shaking, and you might start acting a little crazy. So I really ought to hit you on the head with this hammer because I am kind of worried about you, about what you are going to do without having a headache.” I say, “Well, I don’t really think I want to do that. I mean, I don’t want you to hit me on the head with a hammer because that would hurt. And that is what I am coming to you for—I want to get rid of that.” So he puts the hammer away and he says, “You know, you white people are all crazy. You tell me you don’t want a headache, but it really feels to me that it is so important to you. I am just a teacher who is here to help you. I want to give you what is most important to you. I don’t want you to go away from here feeling like you didn’t get what you wanted. I mean, it is my job to try to give you what is most important to you.”“Man! I am feeling really confused.” He says, “That is good. It is good that you feel confused. Yes, that is good that you feel confused.” And then he says, “Are you sure you wouldn’t rather have a headache?” And I say, “No, I don’t think I want to have a headache, but I am really feeling confused.” And he says, “Well, you now have a few minutes left on this [drumming] tape. Are you sure you want to feel confused all the rest of the tape? I know it is not familiar to you to feel confused.” I say, “Yes, it feels real uncomfortable. Like I don’t know what to talk with you about.” He says, “Well, if you want certainty, if you think being confused is bad and if you want to be sure about something.…” He reaches back into the toolbox and pulls out the hammer. “I will hit you right on top of the head. You will have a nice headache, and your whole life will be compressed into a nice little package. You would know exactly what you would have to do. And you wouldn’t be confused anymore. And all the rest of your day will be taken care of. It will be real simple. You can feel bad, you can go take a couple of Tylenol, and you can go to bed. Then the problem of living the rest of the day in confusion will be solved.” I say, “Man, you are a trip. No, I don’t want you to hit me with the hammer. Put the damn hammer away!” He says, “You sound a little bit angry.” “No. I am not angry.” He says, “Well, you told me to put the damn hammer away! That sounds a little angry to me.” I say, “I guess I was feeling a little bit angry because I am feeling frustrated. Because I am feeling confused right now. This is not what I expected when I came up here.” He says, “What are you laughing about if you are angry?” “I am not laughing.” He says, “Yes, you were. You just chuckled.” “Well, yes, because this whole thing is so weird.” He gets up and says, “Come here, I want to show you something.” I follow him out the front door and I go around the side into the door of one of the smaller cones. Right as we go through the door, he says, “I want you to stop right here. This is going to be really heavy.” Then he shakes his head and says, “I don’t know. I don’t know if you have got the power to do this. You may not make it through this one. This is heavy duty, this stuff here. I don’t know if you want to be a shamanic counselor this bad.” I am saying to him, “Come on, why did you bring me here if you didn’t want to show it to me?” “Well, okay, but don’t blame me if you get clobbered.” So we go down these stairs and we come out in a rain that is full of all different kinds of minerals. There are crystals—all different kinds of crystals. There is quartz. There is—I don’t know the names of them. There is yellow and green and red. They all seem to be shining by their own light.He looks at me and says, “What do you think of this?” I say, “This is really powerful. I can really feel the power in this place.”He says, “Yes, this is real industrial-strength shamanism, isn’t it? This is big medicine.” “Why did you say you didn’t know if I could handle this?” He says, “You really have such a thing going. Such a good thing going with those headaches that I don’t know if you would really be interested in this. Because this is pretty flashy. And the energy is real high here. Yes, you see all kinds of neat stuff here. Sit down here for a while and you will get real confused. Yes, you will see beings of light and all kinds of spirits and real powerful stuff starting to happen here. It is probably going to be real confusing and disorienting to you. You will probably come out of here after a couple of minutes begging me to give you headaches, so you will again know what you are doing.” This guy has got no sympathy at all. He says, “What do you mean, I have got no sympathy at all? I understand perfectly what your dilemma is, and I am offering to help you with it. You don’t have a headache right now and you don’t know what to do about it.” He goes on: “You know, you work real hard to create those headaches. Maybe you don’t have one for a couple of days, and during those two days you have been really working steadily to have a headache. I just want to give you what you need. You better go home now, because the drum is sounding [the call-back signal]. Whenever you want a headache, come on by, and I will be glad to oblige you.” So now here I come. Back down through the cloud layer. Back onto the mountaintop. Now I am coming back into the room. And I don’t have a headache.12 The Westerner in this account was doing his journey out loud in the silent presence of the shamanic counselor. Immediately after the journey the shamanic counselor asked, “What do you believe happened?” Student: “I don’t even know what to say. I am feeling like I just met somebody who has my number.” Counselor: “Knows you a little too well.” Student: “The interesting thing is that I have met this guy before. But I have never had that kind of interaction.” Counselor: “Do you think your question was answered?” Student: “Yes. But not in a second or two. I was looking for the solution to this problem.… But this guy! A completely new idea about the whole thing: when I don’t have one, I am hoping I get one. Almost like an addiction. He said, ‘I know it is confusing to you to be without a headache. I can give you one if you want one.’ “I just met someone who saw right through me. I was just as transparent as thin air. I felt some moments of frustration with him because he wouldn’t do it the way I wanted him to do it. And I also feel like he knows me. “He was giving me information that I needed. You know, that kind of presence in my life has incredible value. I mean, he just … he put me into a completely different frame of reference altogether. That whole experience touched me in a way that it is difficult to find the words to talk about it. “I really feel like it got through the whole problem of what my headaches are all about. You know, more so than anything I have ever had before. “It is like I am almost afraid that if I talk about it right now, I am going to lose the impact of the experience. I feel I just need to sit with it, because otherwise I am afraid I will talk myself out of what just happened.” ALBERT EINSTEIN My intention on this journey was to find a teacher and ask him to heal my fear of separation. To begin, I go to the top of a mountain in Baja California, Mexico. So I’m waiting for a lift from someone, but I space out. The next thing I know, an eagle swoops up at me and hits me in the stomach. I say, “Hey, what’s the big idea?” And the eagle says, “I’ve been circling around, but you’ve been in dreamland and I had to get your attention.” Then, this scene disappears and we’re in a boy’s bedroom in a suburban house. I’ve seen it in a movie called The Boy Who Could Fly. We look out the window and the bird says, “Let’s go.” I say I don’t want to ride on him, and he tells me to become my bird, a white eagle with gold-tipped feathers. So I do this morphing thing and we fly up into the sky and pass through this blanket of white puffy clouds. As I look out to the horizon, above the cloud layer, I see a long building with a tower in the center with a flag on it. My first reaction is it’s either a toy store or a school. As I fly to it, and in, I see it is a school. There are children running up and down the stairs. I fly towards the vice principal’s office and know my teacher’s not in there. Then the children disappear and I am walking down an empty hallway and into a science lab. It is empty except for an old man with bushy hair in the corner. He turns around and I recognize him as Albert Einstein. My mind says, “Yeah right,” but I ask anyway. “Are you my teacher?” He says, “You don’t want me to be your teacher.” I say, “Are you my teacher?” He says, “I don’t look the way you want your teacher to look.” I repeat, “Are you my teacher?” And, finally, he says, “Yes, I am.” Then he adds, “You have a lot of teachers you are not willing to recognize.” And I understood: teachers in the Middle World may not come in the form of teachers. They could be people we’re in conflict with, or strangers on the street. Albert says, “It’s all relative” and laughs.13 WHY DON’T THE TEACHERS DESCEND TO HEAL IN OUR WORLD? They do descend, when a shaman respectfully ascends to a teacher, makes a request, and with permission merges with the teacher and descends with it to heal a patient in the Middle World. This involves intense concentration by the shaman to maintain the merging with the spirit, especially when the two do their healing work together in the Middle World. Then the shaman, still merged, returns to the Upper World, thanks the teacher, and comes back to the familiar world. Why does the teacher not stay in the Middle World permanently to heal and help? One of the reasons is because the shaman cannot long maintain the concentration necessary to continue the merging, or embodiment. There is much more to know regarding such matters, but this knowledge is best acquired experientially with advanced training and practice such as in the Foundation’s “Three-Year Program of Advanced Initiations in Shamanism and Shamanic Healing.” 11 Cosmic Dismemberment, Union, and Healing Power In my eye sockets are two emeralds. I am being healed. From the very base of my body. From the very base. From my bones. Where my third eye would be is a diamond, a cut diamond. The facets are sending out light. I am an amethyst skeleton with two emeralds as eye sockets and a cut diamond where my third eye is. That is what I am now. Right at this moment. —from a Westerner’s report Avery famous kind of shamanic experience that has long perplexed many scholars and ethnographers is related in indigenous reports of the dismemberment of the shaman’s body. Lurid accounts in the anthropological literature told of shamans who described how their bodies had been torn apart, chopped up and eaten, or otherwise dismembered, and then reassembled.1 Details varied, but in the most commonly reported cases of dismemberment, the shamans found themselves being attacked and their bodies being destroyed down to the bones. These dramatic experiences were most famously reported for Siberian peoples but were also widely reported for the Inuit, the Aboriginal peoples of Australia, and other shamanic peoples. Scholars and anthropologists generally seemed to have no explanation, although some suggested that the shamans were either lying or psychotic. For others, the dismemberment experiences were just additional evidence of the barbaric and primitive nature of shamanism as a form of spirituality. My own experientially oriented investigations while practicing and teaching shamanism led me to quite different conclusions. A key to understanding how dismemberments happen to shamans is an awareness of the existence of two realities, for the shamans’ dismemberment takes place in nonordinary reality. In NOR, shamans can experience dismemberment in any of the three worlds. As I taught shamanism in workshops beginning in the mid-1970s, I found that students who had never heard of shamanic dismemberment were having spontaneous dismemberment experiences, sometimes even in their first journey to either the Lower or Upper World during introductory workshops. Their dismemberment experiences could occur unexpectedly at any time and were completely painless. Beyond that, the Westerners often reported deep ecstasy in these experiences. The “ecstasy” I speak of here is not just the theological term for an altered state of consciousness, but an ecstatic sense of merging with “everything” and oneness with the universe. Also surprising was the similarity of their experiences with the accounts of indigenous shamans, such as those of Siberia. It became clear to me that we were documenting an experience not based on cultural expectations. For example, let us start with an anthropologically famous representative Siberian experience offered by A. A. Popov. BEING CUT UP AND COOKED IN A CAULDRON: A SIBERIAN SAMOYED ACCOUNT A Samoyed shaman was very ill and expected to die. Almost unconscious, he made a spontaneous journey to the Lower World, where he was led on by two spirit animal helpers, Mouse and Ermine. Following them, he “came to a desert and saw a distant mountain. After three days’ travel he reached it.…” Note that such journeys away from our world are “outside of time” and are not ordinary-reality days. The same is true for the mention of “three years,” below. … [He] entered an opening and came upon a naked man working a bellows. On the fire was a cauldron “as big as the Earth.” The naked man saw him and caught him with a huge pair of tongs. The novice [shaman] had time to think, “I am dead!” The man cut off his head, chopped his body into bits, and put everything into the cauldron. There he boiled the body for three years … [Later] the blacksmith fished the [Samoyed man’s] bones out of a river in which they were floating, put them together, and covered them with flesh again.2 The blacksmith also changed the Samoyed’s eyes so that he could see shamanically, and fixed his ears so that he could understand the language of plants. All these events clearly took place in nonordinary reality during the journey. Westerners also may have the experience of being away days or even years. BEING CUT UP, COOKED IN A CAULDRON, DEATH AND REBIRTH: A WESTERNER’S ACCOUNT For comparison, now consider this account from a present-day Euro-American who had neither heard nor read of dismemberment experiences. His assigned mission was simply to journey to meet an unknown animal in the Lower World. (The contemporary Westerners’ dismemberment experiences were similar in both the Upper and Lower Worlds; none were reported in the Middle World.) Following is the report of his spontaneous and unexpected experience. To the sound of monotonous drumming, he went down through the hole at the bottom of a tree he knew in ordinary reality, then through a cave, and emerged into sunlight on the first level of the Lower World. There he met a fawn that led him to a grassy and forested knoll where there were other deer. Like shamans who in some cultures sing their journey experiences as they travel, as he journeyed he narrated his experiences into a tape recorder while he listened to the drumming through earphones. His own words tell the rest. I don’t know what I should do—whether I should sit down, stand up, or walk, or … oh, the deer disappeared. It’s like I stayed at the knoll, but you know, the sun went down. And it’s dark now and there’s a fire. And now I’m just supposed to be with the animal but it is like there’s something going on around the fire. It’s like there is a pot or a cauldron boiling. The voices are calling to me to come closer. I’m supposed to look into the boiling pot. I don’t know if I want to though. I’m wondering where the deer is because that’s all I was supposed to do is be with this animal. I don’t know, I feel like it’s around. Oh, I’m the deer. It’s like I’m the animal now. I’m like the fawn and I’m real cautious about, you know, wanting to approach the fire and, you know, look into the bubbling cauldron. Oh, dear! The scene has changed. Just like it went dark and I thought I was the deer and then I became me again. And the deer was separate. Now it’s like a village scene. It’s like dusk, and it’s like a tipi and there are people moving around. I guess I’m in the center of it but I don’t think anyone sees me. I can’t tell where the deer is. Oh, like I’m the deer and everybody is jumping on me or something. And, ah, I’m the deer and they all cut me up and threw me into the pot. That’s why I didn’t—wow, umph—yes, that’s why. I was the deer and I didn’t want to walk in towards the pot. Because now I’m the deer and it’s like no one told me, but I appeared there. And now it’s like they all got me. They put knives in me and cut me up and butchered me and I’m cooking in the pot. And now people are eating me. You know, it’s like I’m cooked up in a stew. This is bizarre. I’m cooked up in a stew and it’s like everyone is eating the deer, but I’m watching it from—I don’t know where I’m watching it from. Oh, I see. It’s like I’m above. I’m above them and I’m just like watching them. And I’m dead. And I’m in their stew pot cooking over the fire. And I’m watching them go about their lives. It’s almost like I didn’t die. I mean, you know, I still feel like I’m alive or something, watching them, but I no longer have a body. And I’m, um, going real deep now. I don’t know what’s going on. Just like I’m fading away. (Singing.) Ah! (Laughter.) Yeah, I died and went to where there were these singing voices and into the darkness but I see that there is more light. It’s like I can go on from here where I am dead, and (laughs) I can come back again. (Intense breathing) … Wow!3 In the above experience, this Western journeyer not only was cut up and cooked in a cauldron, as happened to the Samoyed shaman, but first he had the experience of merging with the deer, separating from the deer, and then being one with the animal while being butchered. Then he saw the scene in an out-of-body type of experience similar to that reported by near-death experience survivors. Thus he learned that he still had existence even though he no longer had a body, an important teaching. As a bystander, he saw his flesh (the same as the deer’s) being eaten— much like reports of Inuit shamans viewing their own bones as onlookers. He also heard singing voices. He received these revelations in a profound shamanic state of consciousness, as indicated by his deep, intense breathing. He also learned, as have shamans long before him, “I can go on from here where I am dead and [laughs] I can come back again.” Death will never again hold the same meaning for him. His laughter is symptomatic of the joy and deep ecstasy resulting from a dismemberment and resurrection experience. “INITIATION” AND DISMEMBERMENT The vivid and incredible nature of dismemberment experiences has caused some Western scholars to focus upon them as the rite of passage or “the initiation” of the shaman. While the experiences can be legitimately viewed as initiations, this does not mean that persons who have passed through them are immediately shamans. Normally many months, probably years, of successful healing and helping others using shamanic methods would be necessary for a person to be called a shaman. The ability of that person to produce miracles of healing through shamanic work is usually the real criterion, and the decision to give someone that name is made by others who have witnessed the miracles. Initiation by the spirits is really a never-ending process when one is doing serious shamanism. Frequently the best shamans and shamanic practitioners are those who have had the longest practice and experience, often including repeated dismemberments. Among Siberian shamans I have known, there is almost a competition to let others know how many dismemberments they have experienced. Perhaps this is because dismemberments are profound teachings as well as healings that transform shamanic journeyers at a deep spiritual level. The following example of a journey by a Euro-American woman illustrates this point. A WESTERNER’S DISMEMBERMENT AND REBIRTH WITH A HEALING AND NEW BODY This woman, Nicolina Halvorson (hereafter “NH”), on a mission to her teacher in the Upper World, had never heard nor read of the dismemberment experience. To her astonishment, she was both dismembered and reconstituted with new body parts after asking the teacher for advice on achieving optimum health. This is her simultaneous narration of what happened as she journeyed, listening with earphones to a drumming tape and recording out loud what she was experiencing in this ascension to the Upper World. NH starts her ascension. I am floating slowly upward from the plateau. I am beginning to pass through a cloud, floating up. It is a gray cumulus cloud. I am still floating up. I am going through something else: a clear sheet of haze. Now I am standing on a plain. The ground is a hazy yellow. A sort of ghost horse with an Indian on it is approaching. He turns back toward some hazy mountains. There are two other horses with Indians on them. They seem quite ethereal and ghostlike. Now I am turning toward another direction. I see a very beautiful Indian princesslike goddess. She has on a buckskin dress with glass beading across the chest. The design is a purple flower with yellow leaves. There is an edge of black beads around them. The tail of an animal is hanging from her waist, an ermine tail hanging down from a belt around her hips. She has on moccasins with beads, like those that were on her chest. I see her face more clearly now. She is tall, slender, and she has high cheek bones. She is wearing a beaded headband. On each side of the headband is something of an animal nature hanging right by her temples. She is smiling. “Are you my teacher?” She is my teacher. “I have a question. Could you please answer it? How can I have optimum health?” She reaches out her hands toward my hands. She has her hands on the tops of mine. Her skin is quite soft and warm. I feel an electrical sensation flowing from her hands up my arms as far as my elbows. It is sort of infiltrating past my elbows with green light, reaching my shoulders. Purple, like neon light, is swirling at each of my shoulders. Our hands have become one. We are merged at the hands. I am starting to take on energy that is flowing from her body. A ray of red neon-type light is shooting from the purple light on my shoulders into my chest area. The teacher takes her hands and NH feels “an electrical sensation” flowing into her. This is one of the ways that spiritual power feels, like a kind of energy, as it is passed on to a shaman or from a shaman to a patient. Indeed, the journeyer immediately recognizes that she is “taking on energy.”The power or energy manifests as green and purple light that sends red light into her chest. Then a white light floats out of her chest (below). Similarly, Amazonian Shuar shamans see a person’s power manifesting as light in rainbow colors in the chest and, in the case of particularly powerful persons, sometimes as a white light in the chest.4 NH is undergoing spiritual death and rebirth. As Eliade has observed: “All experiences of the supernatural light present this common denominator: anyone receiving such an experience undergoes a change in being … a meeting with the light indicates a spiritual rebirth.”5 NH continues: A white light is floating out of my chest. It is exploding, making fireworks, like sky rockets, up into the air and coming down on each side of me. Now a stream of white light is going from my heart to her heart. We are connected at our hearts. The stream of white light is becoming quite large. Our whole chests are connected with white light. The white light floating out of the journeyer’s chest demonstrates that it is a form of power by exploding. In a similar way, the Shuar in an altered state of consciousness may see a light-emanating power vision (arutam) explode in darkness at a sacred waterfall.6 The white light then goes out from her heart. The radiation of light from one’s body is known to the Iglulik Eskimo as “lighting” or “enlightenment” and is part of shamanic initiation.7 An Iglulik shaman described it as follows: I had gained my gaumang, my enlightenment, the shaman-light of brain and body, and this in such a manner that it was not only I who could see through the darkness of life, but the same light also shone out from me, imperceptible to human beings, but visible to all the spirits of earth and sky and sea, and these now came to me and became my helping spirits.8 The light going out from NH’s heart, described above, connects with the heart of her tutelary spirit or teacher. She merges with the spirit teacher and becomes one with her. This “merging with the teacher” is another classic step in shamanic experience, for example in Siberian tribes and among the Tamang of Nepal, as described by Larry Peters, where the shamans connect with their spirit teachers in the Upper World and in white light become one with them.9 NH goes on: Now the connection is beginning to happen between our foreheads. It is yellow light now becoming a solid golden yellow rod. It is light that has become solidified between her forehead and mine. We are becoming one. A green light is circling my waist and becoming a figure eight connecting her waist with mine and flowing between our waists. Her hands aren’t lying on top of mine anymore. We are joined at the fingers now. We have one set of fingers that go from my hand to her hand. There are no fingernails. We are joined at the fingertips. There is a band of purple light around our pelvic areas. Our legs are merging at the knees with a pink light. Our toes have become one. There is a golden light surrounding us. We are becoming one. We are merging into one body. We are one. We are spinning. We are one ball. Spinning. Spinning over a landscape like a golden tumbleweed. There are sparks of light pouring off us. We are a whirlwind of light. We are spinning light. We are one spinning light. Golden light. Thrashing, sparking. We are pure electricity now. Yellow light becomes a golden rod connecting her forehead to that of her teacher. The forehead among the Australian aboriginal shamans is the location of the “strong eye” that permits one to see shamanically.10 The merging with her teacher continues, while a “figure eight” connects them (the infinity symbol is commonly experienced spontaneously in Westerners’ journeys). Then they become one, pure energy or power. NH reports: We have collided with something. We rolled into a stone, something like a big granite block, and have split into two halves. I am a piece of solid gold. I am in gold rock form. She is also in gold rock form. I am a piece of solid rock. I am gold. I am in the form of gold. My human form is not here. It feels a bit scary wondering if I will get my human form back again, because being in gold is like being paralyzed. A hand is coming out of that other half of the piece of gold. She is reaching out to me. I have an arm coming out of the gold, too. Once again we are holding hands. It is my right hand in her left hand. She is stepping out of her half of the golden ball. I see her again. She is trying to pull me out. I am not coming out very easily. Just my arms are out. I am a skeleton. I am a skeleton of purple glowing light. My skeleton is made of amethyst. That is all there is of me. NH becomes a skeleton, first of light and then of amethyst, a kind of quartz crystal. “That is all there is of me,” she says. Becoming a skeleton is one of the most famous and widespread shamanic initiatory experiences, being described in detail by peoples in Siberia, as well as among the Eskimo and in Australia. NH continues: In my eye sockets are two emeralds. I am being healed. From the very base of my body. From the very base. From my bones. Where my third eye would be is a diamond, a cut diamond. The facets are sending out light. I am an amethyst skeleton with two emeralds as eye sockets and a cut diamond where my third eye is. That is what I am now. Right at this moment. She receives emerald and diamond crystals in her head, another common cross-cultural initiatory experience of receiving power. Similarly, among the South American Cobeuo Indians, a shaman “introduces rock crystals into the novice’s head; these … then take the place of these organs and become his ‘strength.’ ”11 It is well known in many shamanic cultures that crystal (usually quartz) power helps the shaman to see.12 For example, among the Wiradjeri of Australia, quartz crystals were put into water to be drunk in order for one to be able to “see ghosts” (or spirits).13 When the Australian aboriginal journeyed to the Upper World, sometimes the spirit teacher Baiame “sang” a quartz crystal into the forehead of the journeyer “so that he would be able to see right into things.”14 NH goes on: My teacher now looks like she was when I first saw her. But I look like something from outer space. I don’t have any flesh. Liquid is pouring down on me. Something like liquid gold is pouring down on top of my skeleton. It is turning into veins and arteries. I see my heart. My heart is gold. I am getting veins now and they are liquid gold. And my heart is gold.Then liquid gold flows into her, becoming her arteries, veins, and heart. This echoes reported shamanic journey experiences among the Yakut of Siberia, where a future shaman, after being reduced to a skeleton, is given new blood.15 NH continues: I am an amethyst skeleton with emerald eyes, a cut diamond in my forehead, and now I have a golden heart with arteries and veins of gold. There is a liver being formed for me somewhere. It is made of—it looks like ruby. It is like a liquid ruby. I see hands putting it into the place where my liver would be. There it is. Now there are hands bringing other organs to me. It is happening so quickly I can’t see what each organ is. There is my spleen now—it is like liquid sapphire. I think I am being made of stones. It is strange. These stones are spirit helpers for my body. These stones are healing me. My body is being healed. She receives new bodily organs in the form of healing stones—in other words, stones of power. This parallels the shamanic initiation of the Unmatjera tribe of Australia, in which atnonqara stones are placed in the initiate’s body in connection with providing him a new set of internal organs.16 A similar initiatory experience is reported for the Binbinga tribe.17 NH continues: Flesh is coming in. It is flesh. It is new flesh. I have muscles now too. They are strong. They are strong new muscles. The flesh is new. The hair is new. The teeth are new. I am being healed at a cellular level. By precious stones. I still don’t recognize myself. I almost feel like I have wings, like I am an angel. I feel like I have died. The process of receiving new flesh is typically reported in the dismemberments of tribal shamans. The healing is completed by giving this journeyer an entirely new body. This is generally considered by scholars to represent death and then the rebirth of the person as a shaman. Indeed, she says, “I have died.” This is similar to the earlier statement by the Westerner who felt he had died and then returned. NH goes on: I am an angel. I have wings. They are golden wings. I have a white robe on. And I have a golden light coming out of my head. This, too, echoes the experiences of shamans in other cultures. For example, again among the Wiradjeri of Australia, the journeyer grows wings after receiving quartz crystal water in the Upper World from Baiame.18 “The growing of wings,” as Eliade notes, “as a result of mystical initiation is a well-known motif, found also in the higher religions. Thus, for instance, the Taoists believe that when a man obtains the tao, feathers begin to grow on his body.”19 NH continues: My teacher is touching me with her hands. I am returning to my human form again. I kneel. She says, “You have a new body. You will know how to take care of it.” My health has been restored. I have been healed by the stones. [She sings.] A golden rod of lights is coming in through my head and coming out of each leg at my toes. It is making a humming sound. The understanding of how to take care of her new body presumably is a result of the power and knowledge she has received. The journeyer states, “My health has been restored.” She sings, in a state of deep ecstasy, aware that she has a new body free of illness. Dismemberment and reconstitution, as those of us who have experienced it know, is a healing in which the journeyer receives a new spiritual body, free of illness and pain, with positive consequences for one’s health in ordinary reality. NH goes on: I am lying down now. My teacher is sitting beside me. I see green people at my feet. I don’t know if they are real or if they are Egyptian mummies. They don’t look human. The middle one seems human. I think she has a message for me. She is handing me something on a tray. It is a ball, a glass ball. She says, “It is filled with light and energy. It is all the energy that you will need.” “Thank you. Thank you.” It is a gift. It is a gift from a very ancient being. It is such an important gift. It took three people to give it to me—one to hold the energy and the two others to somehow help and protect it. It is a very beautiful, wonderful gift. I am very grateful. I don’t know what to say. “Thank You.” This was a gift of power. She was given the gift of a glass ball “filled with light and energy.” That she calls it “glass” rather than “crystal” represents the fact that she is seeing something of which she does not yet have full knowledge, for the crystal ball, ground down into a sphere from a large quartz crystal, is a direct descendant of the shaman’s quartz crystal representing light and power—the quartz crystal often being used by tribal shamans as a power object par excellence, such as among shamans of the Upper Amazon and Aboriginal Australia.20 NH continues: “Thank you” doesn’t seem like it could ever be enough. There is a purple light coming out of my shoulder, like rods of light. I am being called back now by the drum. My teacher is sitting me up. We embrace. I thank her. I am walking back. She is behind me but I don’t know if she is coming with me. I am floating down. I am floating down. Rose petals are floating down, too. I am now back, sitting on the plateau. This was an emotion-filled journey. Afterward, NH had this to say: I asked how I could have optimum health, and I was changed, energized, turned into pure energy, and then into metal. I felt I was really metal. Then I was built up again from the skeleton, and helped by the mineral kingdom and stones. I was recreated and then given all the energy I needed. And I was told that I would know how to take care of myself. Being changed into so many different things has left me a little stunned. I feel like my question is answered, more than I thought it would be answered. At times it was scary. Just being in such a different form than I am used to. A part of me was afraid, when I was the metal and then the skeleton, that I wouldn’t get the rest of the body back. Also when I was the angel I didn’t know if I would get my body back again. A lot of the time I was frightened about what was happening to me—all of the energy changes. I think it might take me a little while to sort of absorb it all and incorporate it. [My teacher] didn’t tell me that I was going to be healed or recreated. She didn’t tell me anything. I didn’t know anything. It just started happening. So I got slightly blown away. I guess I felt I died. When I first came back I felt frightened because I wondered, do I still know my children? Do I still know anybody that I knew? But I am sure that as time goes by I will. In fact, I probably know everybody still. But I feel like I am new. I was recreated, but instead of turning back into me, I turned into an angel first. I finally got a body back, but it was an angel. I knew I wasn’t back. Then my teacher touched my cheek, and I turned back into me. She was helping to bring me back. I was told that now I had the new body, and that I would know how to take care of it. It was like I was given a second chance.21 “A second chance,” of course, is another way of saying that a new beginning to her life had commenced, or that she had undergone an initiatory experience. She had been built up from the skeleton: reerected, resurrected, remembered—any and all of these words could apply. An important reason that dismemberment–rememberment is often recognized by shamans as a critical, even initiatory, occurrence is that it not only resurrects one with new power, but it can also radically expand the shaman’s perspective about reality. Through the experience, the shamanic journeyers temporarily have much of their ordinary-reality personal history erased, an important part of “remembering” their unity with nonordinary reality. For comparison, let us consider the case of a man named Ilpailurkna of the Australian Unmatjera tribe. Like the Western woman whose experience has just been described, he underwent a dismemberment and reconstitution involving the use of stones in the replacement of his internal organs. When he came out of this altered state of consciousness, he had no idea where he was. Ilpailurkna had completely forgotten who he was and all about his past life. After a time the old man [his ordinary-reality mentor] led him back to his camp and showed it to him, and told him that the woman there was his lubra, for he had forgotten all about her. His coming back this way and his strange behaviour at once showed the other natives that he had been made into a medicine man.22 Although our Western journeyer, NH, had not even heard of shamanic dismemberment prior to her own experience, note what she said upon her return: “I felt frightened because I wondered, do I still know my children? Do I still know anybody that I knew?” Her remarks strikingly echo the account of Ilpailurkna’s experience. While she feared she would not know anyone upon returning from her journey, she subsequently found this fear groundless. Yet these two examples, Western and Aboriginal Australian, illustrate how the dismemberment experience is much more than the simple replacement of body parts, for the “remembering” of organs, including the brain and the heart, is also an awakening from ego-centered preoccupations with one’s own personal history in ordinary reality and remembering or reconnecting with a very ancient and sacred memory. DISMEMBERING, REMEMBERING, AND UNION What is this remembering? It is one memory and yet many. It is the Dreamtime. It is the mythic reality. It is the reality where there is no time. It is the memory of the union with the universe that existed before we were each individualized through conception and birth into this ordinary reality. It is the memory of the cosmic consciousness from which we came and to which we will return. Besides receiving new power, an important unexpected gift from dismemberment– rememberment is the gift of experiencing, however briefly, dismembering our ordinary-reality consciousness and experiencing rememberment not just of the body but of the mind, remembering our union with the infinite, the ineffable, the total universe. This remembering, because it is union, does not have particular defining characteristics and thus is almost impossible to describe. Even the classic stories of sacred union in the histories of the major religions cannot convey adequately those experiences of deep ecstatic union, for they are ineffable experiences, beyond the confines of language. One should therefore not be surprised that ethnographers and other Western observers rarely elicited information on such experiences from shamans. Indeed, there seems to be little evidence that most Western fieldworkers were even looking for the possibility of such ineffable experiences among “primitive” peoples. A rare exception or two can be found in the writings of the great part-Eskimo (and possibly shaman) ethnographer Knud Rasmussen, as mentioned earlier.23 As a virtually indescribable experience, the deep ecstasy often accompanying dismemberment was rarely communicated to researchers and documented for shamans in the ethnographic literature. In contrast, the readily describable details of the recounted dismemberments were easily noted and did find their way into Western ethnographic reports. As a consequence, it is understandable that many Western scholars have prematurely assumed that tribal shamans were limited to “gross” experiences and were less “evolved” in their spiritual work than practitioners of the Eastern and Western civilizations’ spiritual disciplines.Not surprisingly, even Western journeyers, when asked to convey the emotional experiences they had upon dismemberment, have difficulty describing them. For example, one said: “I think it’s what we call love.… There doesn’t seem to be any separate intelligence there, separateness there.… It’s one tremendously vast presence which just is. [crying, sobbing] It feels like nothing, but it’s everything. I keep describing it, but I don’t have any words for it.”24 ANOTHER KIND OF DISMEMBERMENT: INTENTIONAL Particularly in the early years of my teaching, dismemberments happened spontaneously when students were ascending to the Upper World or descending to the Lower, and without my having mentioned the possibility to them beforehand. Eventually, since the students expressed enthusiasm about their unexpected and profound dismemberment experiences in the Upper and Lower Worlds, I decided to see if advanced students could achieve them voluntarily. The results were very successful, and I include below a few examples of their accounts. The intentional ascension or journey for dismemberment should be prefaced by significant advanced training in shamanism, for it is an important initiation, and it should not be practiced just on the basis of reading this book. Shamanic ascensions or other journeys for intentional dismemberment as recounted here are part of a careful sequence of initiations that I strategically planned for students considered ready for this next phase. It should be reiterated that this exercise, to ascend intentionally to the Upper World to be dismembered, and to return, did not come from the literature on comparative religions but directly from the experiential approach of core shamanism. Now, in retrospect, I can say that this straightforward core exercise from the Foundation for Shamanic Studies somewhat resembles the most advanced chöd practice of Tibetan lamas, although I am not clear if some go out of the Middle World to do it. In chöd, the purposes and ritual methods are complex and complicated by local spiritual and religious elaborations, with one approach used by the village shamans and another used by the lamas. For Tamang village shamans in Nepal, who are linguistically and culturally Tibetan, the chöd dismemberment is part of a method of helping to heal a community and is done in the Middle World. Specifically, in the shamans’ chöd ritual the intention is for the shamans to gather into their own bodies pollution from localities in their communities, and then invite the local ghosts, who cause illness by eating the living members of the community, to come and feed on the shamans instead and absorb the pollution. They thereby satisfy the ghosts’ hunger and, at the same time, accomplish the consumption of the pollution in the community through their consuming the shamans in this special form of dismemberment. A sacred union with a spirit, with hints of a possible infinite union, often occurred for the shamans consequent to dismemberment.25 For Tibetan lamas, the advanced form of chöd dismemberment is used as a secret method specifically to obtain sacred union, according to W. Y. Evans-Wentz.26 Lamas pursuing dismemberment are taught as initiates to have the intention of seeking union involving loss of ego, presumably in infinite union, so it is difficult on that evidence alone to assert that their subsequent experiences were independent of their prior programming.This is one of the ways in which their dismemberment exercises were apparently somewhat different from those that I originated for the Foundation, for the possibility of an infinite union outcome was rarely offered to students until after my first years of teaching. The dismemberment journey exercise that I eventually devised was in keeping with the principles and practices of core shamanism, unencumbered by cultural traditions and expectations. It provided minimal methodological instruction, so that students could independently discover its consequences. Following are a few reports of ascensions made with the intention to seek dismemberment. EXPERIENCING THE WHOLE UNIVERSE I asked my loving and compassionate spirit helpers to take me to the Upper World to be dismembered. I went through a tunnel to the Upper World and I ended up being thrown into the sun—it was like a slow burning in which layer after layer of my body was melted, disappearing into the sun as ashes, then as fine particles. The particles wanted to be united with the others and were allowed to do so. Then I entered into a dream state, and as soon as I started dreaming, the whole dream and me were again thrown into the sun, and again the slow burning began. My dream and I were converted into ashes and particles; then I entered a dream state, and again as soon as I started to dream, the whole dream and I were thrown again into the sun. The same cycle happened several times. When the call-back came, I was in my entirety filled in by space (like the space from outer space). It was as if my body was a shell containing the universe inside. I was completely hollow, empty (no body with organs and bones) yet filled with the whole universe. I felt as if I was a shell with a window through which I could see and experience the whole universe. After the dismemberment, while being outside, I had the impression that all the plants in the garden were the same as me, shells holding the whole universe inside them. It was beautiful.27 “THE WHOLE UNIVERSE WAS CONTAINED INSIDE MY BODY” … the Four who had done the dismemberment (Elephant, Merlin, Old Monk, and The Silver One) took what appeared to be a thin, transparent, gossamer remnant of myself and began stretching it out in each of the Four Directions. They stretched and stretched, moving ever outward from the center, out from the Earth, past the sun and planets, the stars and galaxies, to the outer reaches of the Universe itself. When they reached the outer limits, this gossamer thread (like a super-thin spiderweb) suddenly became the outer limits of the universe. At the same time I just as suddenly became me, like an instant rememberment, but now the whole universe was contained inside my body. I had just a brief time to experience this new form of Oneness with the universe before the call-back. It was quite an experience to have the whole universe contained inside my body, to have stars and galaxies, mice and snakes, insects and birds, trees and flowers, mountains and rivers—things that I normally experience as separate entities—now be a part of me in a most intimate way.28 THE UNIVERSAL LIFE FORCE—WE ARE ONE As I started this journey I repeated my intention over and over and asked the compassionate spirits to dismember me. I traveled into the Upper World and quickly to Celeste, my planet teacher, and I circled round and round inside her sphere many times and then outside on her ring. And then I circled around the atmosphere of Earth and I could see all the beautiful living things; then I was taken up, up, up into the distances of outer space … past stars and galaxies and light energies. My body as it was then got very cold and all components—every bit, at the cellular level—became a frozen, solid mass … a big ice cube in outer space. That was the beginning of the destruction, the dismemberment, all cellular connections frozen solid. Then in the distance a ball of intense heat and light, a supernova, raced toward me; and as it neared (but was still very far away) I began to melt slowly—drip, drip, drip—melting into the universe like a Salvador Dalí painting. And then, as the supernova got closer, the intense heat in a flash melted the entirety of me, and “I” as “I” was … was gone … melted into the universe … little droplets (bits) of melted being … dispersed among the vast spaces of the universe. I was one with the celestial beings and nature of the Upper World. I spent a long time merging with that energy and rhythm, and the spirits told me to just drink it in. They showed me different light energies—purple and yellow—and they took me to the Earth to merge with various animals and plants and waters. I asked them if there were certain parts of me that needed changing … and they said: no, not specific parts, just a total energy shift … toward “heart” and “light.” In the outer reaches of the universe they reassembled me … and I could physically feel my musculature form from head to toe … coming back together as a unit again—with incredible strength and peace. And I existed in that form in the universe for a while (and I thought that I was all put back together). I lay there as various things happened. Stardust showered on my body and was absorbed through my skin … light energies came by again (purple and yellow) … and I just merged with it all. Then, all of a sudden, there was a pounding in my chest which was very real and very physical. They said they were giving me the heartbeat of the universe—and that I would no longer be separate in that sense (from the universe). The lesson for me was to lose that sense of individuation. The heartbeat they were giving me was/is the heartbeat of the universe, and now the heartbeat (mine and the universe’s) are one and the same. Now, within my body, there would always be this connection (direct link) to the universal life force—we are one. This heartbeat gives me life in this form—in this reality of individuation—but I am never to forget that the heartbeat inside this body of mine is the heartbeat of the universe. It connects me to all things. It is a direct link to the spirit world. I am never to forget, hide from, or disallow this connection. It resides in me in a very present way now through this pounding in my chest (although it was always there); it is a re-awakening … a re-remembering (!) … a true gift from the spirits. Body-soul-spirit are now consciously connected—never to be forgotten. It has been experienced. I came back down to Earth on the supernova and tumbled down through the atmosphere and to my tree and landed in my nest—to be held there.29 THE COMPASSION OF THE UNIVERSE AS AN IRRESISTIBLE FORCE I had barely stated my intention to ask for a dismemberment when Eagle snapped me up in her claws. She flew me up to her nest, pulled my flesh apart, ate me, and regurgitated me into the mouths of her chicks. I was digested by the chicks and became parts of their cells as they grew and fledged. I became their scat on rocks. As it rained, I became liquid and was consumed by the Earth into her soil. I traveled up the hair roots of trees. Up, up the trunks, into the branches and into the leaves. I evaporated into the sky. As moisture I became clouds. I was blown by the wind, got very full and burst into rain. The rain became streams, rivers, and a large lake with boats floating on it. I am the water. I am the wake behind the boat, moving furiously, flying through the air. I spill over a dam and into a river again. I move forward and become water in the water-treatment plants to supply water to humans. I come out of the tap and into a glass. I am consumed by a human. I move throughout the body and am expelled as urine. I merge with other water and am flushed away, on to another treatment plant and into the ocean. I am ocean spray from waves, carried into the air. I am one tiny molecule. I travel up to become the ice crystals of a jet stream. I am floating, melting, moving upward, out past our galaxy limits. I float in the quiet. I see a large imploding nebula and am taken in by its power. I am spit back out as millions of myself floating in the universe. I regather into a tiny drop and Eagle appears and takes this in her beak and flies me to the sun. I become steam. Eagle gathers all of my particles with a sweeping motion of her wings, and I am formed into a multifaceted crystal. She carries me back to her nest. An image of the human me, looking like a deflated, plastic blow-up doll, is lying on the ground beneath the nest. She picks up the crystal me and flies down and places it in the area of my solar plexus in the flat me. As she places the crystal, I inflate and become my human form again. The crystal is now inside me. Eagle says, “You have been one with the universe and now the universe is within you.” I thank Eagle for this beautiful gift and journey. I hear the call-back and reluctantly come back to OR.30 SEEKING COSMIC UNION WITHOUT DISMEMBERMENT The following two Westerners were invited to seek cosmic union while in the Upper World. Dismemberment was not mentioned to them. One succeeded in achieving various experiences of union. The other achieved what appears to be cosmic union after an unexpected dismemberment late in the ascension. AN IRRESISTIBLE FORCE I find the mere idea of this journey absolutely amazing. I returned with the most astounding experiences, and the fewest words to describe them with. I can describe the narrative content of the journey, but could not ever describe the effect it had on me. As I began to journey outward, I saw two endangered species of animals that I care very much about—the polar bear and the snow leopard. I realized I will never really lose them because I can journey to their spirits. Then I realized that I am one with them; then I realized that I am them. Next, I saw a friend of mine, who is in a period of deep depression. I realized that part of the reason why I care so much is that here, as I approach cosmic union, I am she. After the above encounters, which seemed relatively close to home, I journeyed very far out. I saw a very gold place in the sky like the light from a gold sunset, surrounded by dark clouds. I entered there and was surrounded by the gold light, and reached what seemed like the end of the cosmos, though to me, that is a contradiction of terms. Here there was pure compassion. I was surrounded and permeated by it. I felt overwhelmed by how much I cared about everything. I experienced the compassion of the universe as an irresistible force that must constantly find expression.I feel that my human existence as a shamanic practitioner can best be described as a great bottleneck, through which only the tiniest, subatomic particle of what is really “out there” can be expressed.31 IT WAS NOTHING AND EVERYTHING ALL TOGETHER In the following case, this person had not yet reached the Upper World (she was still in the astronomer’s universe), and then she dove into the wormhole of a galaxy in that universe. I left from the designated starting point and moved on out and out and out past the sky and the stars and other planets and other times and other places. At one point I nearly passed a wormhole in some galaxy or other. I had traveled far and had seen civilizations and planets and colors and beings, all described in other journeys, so I won’t repeat them here. When I went past that wormhole, I knew this was the place and I turned back and dove through. At this moment, I didn’t know which end was up or which way was forward or backward. I felt much like Alice must have felt when she went through the looking glass. I went down and down and down. I went through things that were big and complex like planets and galaxies that had been sucked into this vortex a long time ago. I went into them and into the things that were in them. I went into planets and saw that they were made of many things. There was not just earthlike material and rocks and water, but there were gases and minerals and things I had never imagined living in there. There were beings both large and small. I found a lot of smaller beings, I don’t want to call them bugs, but they seemed to have their own sort of civilization. They had their own set of rules. The message I got was that this was the only place they could live and so here they were. I went down further into some of the components I found, and there were other civilizations made of beings even tinier than the ones that had previously amazed me. They lived here too. Some lived in fires that burned here and they were quite happy to do so. Others lived in places I found that were as cold as ice. I found more substances and went on into them. I cannot call them molecules or atoms or pi mesons or anything else. Those are not the words that would be used here. Our words in our world don’t mean a thing in this place. These components were small, and as I traveled through, I found more and more civilizations, increasingly smaller than the previous. I think I must have reached some sort of critical mass at one point because I was suddenly surrounded by giant beings, and their world was very odd. It was light in places and very dark in others. I kept going down, diving into whatever material I found, and heading to where I thought the center might be. My feeling was that it had to be somewhere down this wormhole. This was a vortex that would suck everything in the universe into it, and so I should be able to come to the end at some point. I started to feel odd now. It was as if I was leaving myself because I was too big or something. I began to deconstruct and bits of me joined into the vortex as it swept through what we would call time and space, but what I realized now was not time and it was not space. Those things no longer existed for me. I just was. I was just here and this was cosmic union and it was turbulent and peaceful all together. It was colorful and colorless all together. It was nothing and everything all together and I was happy to be here. But I knew I had to return because I do have a mission to achieve in my life and I had to get back to it. I moved on back through the vortex and [came back].32 HEALING POWER What the spirits have in mind for us in our ascensions and other journeys goes far beyond any personally planned goals, for they provide us with gifts according to our needs, not our expectations. Cosmic union is one such gift, a gift that fuses the journeyer with the awesome power of the universe. In this way, shamans become more than themselves, for now they can be midwives to miracles, miracles of helping and healing others. The cosmic dismemberments in the Upper World are different from those in the Middle World, with an example of the latter provided by the Tibetan Tamang tribal shamans. The dismemberments of our Westerners involved no “hungry ghosts,” because when we are fully beyond our Middle World, we do not find hunger nor pain, having left the “suffering beings,” the “ghosts,” behind. The merging in the Upper World was not with suffering beings of the Middle World, but with the entire universe: cosmic union. Concluding with cosmic union, it is now possible to say that the quest for healing power, with which our book started, has almost ended. The next step, if one chooses, is to accept that immense cosmic power through the modulating powers of the compassionate spirits, and to undertake the classic healing work of the shaman to help those who are suffering or in pain. As Essie Parrish, the great California Pomo Indian shaman, said: “Be careful on the journey,” they said, “the journey to heaven,” they warned me. And so I went.… Then when I entered into the place, I knew: if you enter heaven you might have to work.33 12 Spirits, Heavens, and Spiritual Freedom We have gone from seeking spirit power in a cave to experiencing cosmic empowerment engendered by dismemberment. In between there was much more that happened to the Westerners whose accounts became part of the Celestia Study of experiences in nonordinary reality. Unfortunately there is not enough space here to describe more. Now that we are at the final chapter, let us take the opportunity to focus on some important subjects that deserve additional attention. SPIRITS AND SCIENCE The quite common human view that spirits, such as human souls, are real is unacceptable to today’s science, as it has been for several centuries. Although one spirit, God, may be occasionally mentioned (as by Einstein), multiple “spirits” or “souls” are anathema and unacceptable in the scientific paradigm. In other words, Western science is founded upon a belief—the belief that spirits cannot exist. This attitude has its historical origins in the attacks by the Church on such pioneering scientists as Galileo and Copernicus during the Renaissance and Reformation. In reaction, during the Age of “Enlightenment,” Western science and medicine decreed that souls and spirits did not exist and were therefore not relevant to scientific study and medical practice.While this position is quite understandable historically, its perpetuation today limits the parameters of science by decreeing a priori that certain phenomena cannot exist. I am not alone in this view. As my colleague Paul Uccusic pointed out to me, the great German philosopher Immanuel Kant once said about spirits: “There cannot be found any reason a priori [Kant’s italicization] to deny their existence.”1 Even today science has yet to disprove the theory of the existence of spirits. And disproof of a theory, or falsification, is a cornerstone of scientific method, as noted by Karl Popper.2 As long as the theory of the existence of spirits is not falsified, it cannot logically be ignored by science. In other words, the position of science that spirits do not exist has quite unscientifically been a matter of faith, ironically resembling religious dogma. A notable exception in the scientific community was the great natural scientist Alfred Russel Wallace, the simultaneous originator with Charles Darwin of the theory of natural selection. In the years subsequent to Darwin’s publication of On the Origin of Species in 1859, Wallace made a painstaking investigation of the reality of spirits that culminated in his 1874 book, Miracles and Modern Spiritualism.3 Despite Wallace’s careful research, his book received a generally hostile reception. In 1896, responding to his critics in a later edition, he stated: That theory is the most scientific which best explains the whole series of phenomena; and I therefore claim that the spirit.hypothesis is the most scientific, since even those who oppose it most strenuously often admit that it does explain all the facts, which cannot be said for any other hypothesis.4 Unlike the Westerners who were hostile to Wallace’s book, indigenous shamans had long since reached conclusions similar to his. Conducting countless healing experiments with their patients, often in life-and-death situations, their results consistently supported his conclusions, or, better said, his supported theirs. This they did over many millennia in thousands of different cultures and independently on five different continents. Not surprisingly, the fundamentals of indigenous shamanic practice are remarkably consistent throughout the world and provide the basis for core shamanism. As Wallace indicated, such phenomena can best be explained according to the scientific principle of parsimony, and that parsimonious explanation is simply that the spirits are real. This is not to suggest that one should avoid seeking nonspiritual explanations of shamanic phenomena.Among the most famous of the “impossible” phenomena are, of course, the accounts of near-death experiences (NDEs). Apparently for science they remain inexplicable. A specialist in NDEs summed up the situation this way: “What thirty years of scholarly inquiry has not yet revealed is why NDEs occur.”5 Similarly, when I asked Charles Tart—an outstanding pioneer in rigorous scientific approaches to the field of parapsychology—what mechanism makes mental telepathy work, he said: “I don’t have the slightest idea, and I don’t think anybody else does either.”6 He later added, “Scientific attempts to explain NDEs and the phenomena of parapsychology have ‘hit a brick wall,’ partly because of the many psychological complexities in this area, and perhaps partly because the reality of spirits has been denied a priori.”7 So the brick wall may be giving way, and Charles Tart is now considering the possibility of spirits having an effect in his experiments. He said, “I’m certainly open to the fact that there is a spirit world of some sort and, so sometimes, maybe many times, I have some ‘co.experimenters’ and I don’t know what they have in mind for that experiment.”8 Of course, Alfred Russel Wallace proposed that the reality of spirits provides an explanation for a variety of otherwise inexplicable phenomena that others have relegated to the acausal categories of “coincidence” or “synchronicity.”9 Wallace’s proposal is not surprising, since the principle of the reality of spirits has been tested and supported cross-culturally by shamans for thousands of years. Once one understands that spirits exist, much that appears impossible to outsiders is really quite understandable and even may be subject to replication. The phenomenon that follows is one such example. THE MIRACLE OF THE UNBOUND SHAMAN: AN INVITATION TO SCIENCE One of the most famous mysteries in shamanism has been observed by visitors to the Arctic regions of Siberia, North America, and Greenland, as well as in the western plains and subarctic areas of indigenous North America: in public séances, tightly bound shamans are spontaneously freed of their bindings without any apparent help. Some Western observers simply have concluded that these feats are inexplicable. Others decided that they must have somehow been the product of legerdemain or fraud. Rather than leaving such mysteries alone in the “dustbin of anthropology” as purported frauds or unsolved events, I have viewed them as exciting challenges to be possibly solved. In working to solve the mystery of the miraculously unbound shaman, I had a tremendous advantage—I knew from firsthand personal experience that the spirits are real. Therefore, my only remaining work was to collect the known facts; to develop hypotheses as to how and why the spirits did what they did in a given situation; to test and improve the hypotheses through personal experiments; and then replicate these “impossible” or “miraculous” results publicly before observers. Eventually, I could teach students the spiritual “secrets” involved to see if they could be unbound themselves. If they could, it would be additional testimony for the existence of spirits.In my first public bound-shaman experiments, others drummed to help me move into the shamanic state of consciousness (SSC), the nature of which has already been described. They then tied my hands and feet tightly with rope, covered my body (head included) with a blanket, and tightly wound rope around my entire body. Then with the drumming continuing around me, I called on certain personal helping spirits to come and help release me from the bindings. It took about three minutes. Such a sudden success caused me to have doubts about the tightness of the bindings. Therefore, for the next experiment, which was public (before my students), I asked that the bindings be as tight as possible so that there would be no chance that I could struggle free on my own. Again I asked the compassionate spirits for help. This time, despite painfully tighter bindings, I successfully struggled to be free again. I repeated this public experiment with painful bindings of maximum tightness several times with the same result. Why was this so? My hypothesis was, and remains, that the suffering encourages one’s compassionate spirit helpers to release the bindings. Yet I was not fully satisfied with the results, for I had been slightly exerting myself physically to assist the spirits in being freed from the tight ropes. Then I remembered how the spirits wish to demonstrate their reality when seriously invited. So I decided, as an experiment, next time not to call for help from the compassionate spirits alone, but to invite Middle World spirits everywhere to demonstrate their reality to the “audience” by coming and freeing me from the bindings. Supported with two or three minutes of fast drumming by the entire audience, I made a continuing plea to all those spirits to free me. The ropes suddenly loosened or dropped off with no struggle at all. Calling in “Middle World spirits everywhere” is not a method to be used in regular healing work, for many of those spirits, such as the suffering beings, are unqualified or unable to help with healing. Healing is fundamentally still up to the compassionate spirits working with the shaman. A distinctive feature of the bound-shaman event is that it gives spirits an opportunity to demonstrate their reality publicly, something that most seem anxious to do. When the demonstration is done, the now unbound shaman thanks them and tells them that they can return from whence they came. After repeating this experiment successfully several more times on different occasions, I explained the procedure to some advanced students and gave them the opportunity to do the same. Generally they succeeded in being freed without any struggle, often especially if tightly bound! Importantly, soon the students were usually able to replicate the results in public settings by invoking spirit help in the manner I instructed. In other words, the unbindings were experiments replicable by others. On these occasions, done usually in darkness, which helps the SSC focus, the spirits generally come to demonstrate their reality in other ways, too. For example, the room or dwelling may shake as if in an earthquake, a phenomenon known in the North American ethnological literature as the “shaking tent.” Also many small lights usually appear and move about in the darkness. Giant humanlike images appear to some. Cold winds may blow through the room. Unseen animals, hands, and objects may touch persons, just as they do in indigenous situations. All these events routinely occur, even to those who have never heard of them before. In summary: why did the spirits come to these public séances to free shamans, shake dwellings, or perform similar feats? The answer was foreshadowed in the chapter titled, “We Exist! The Spirits Call for Recognition.”Perhaps if scientific investigation is made of the repeatable occurrences of the unbound-shaman phenomenon, the spirits may get some of the recognition they deserve. Note: predictable results are based on the experimenter’s assumption of the Reality of Spirits, much as the assumption of the reality of the Law of Gravity is a basis for predictable results in Newtonian physics.10 Caveats: this experiment should be conducted only under the safe supervision of a Foundation for Shamanic Studies faculty member who has taught the practice. Various safeguards include: using a blanket sufficiently porous that bound persons can breathe; not tying the bindings around the neck; a maximum of three minutes for keeping persons fully covered and bound; the practice should not be undertaken by persons with cardiac or respiratory problems. In case of doubt, they should consult a physician first. HEAVENS DEFINING “HEAVEN” OR “HEAVENS” We have seen from the Westerners’ Upper World reports that they commonly entered heavenlike realms with celestial music or singing. Still, did they really enter into what can be defined as “heavens”? For definitional help, I chose to consult Webster’s New Universal Unabridged Dictionary, because it represents American common usage. In Webster’s, we find that the word “heaven” often means “the celestial powers; God.”11 While our Westerners encountered “celestial powers” (Chapters 8–11), a single being in human form who might be called “God” was almost never encountered. This is consistent with an earlier quote—what the Canadian Athapaskan people say of those who drum to heaven: “… they don’t see God. They just see people who are working for God.” Much depends, of course, on how one defines “God.” Some might consider the Westerners’ ineffable and ecstatic unions with the cosmos to be union with “God,” while others might consider use of the concept of “God” in any form as unacceptable. It is really up to those who make the ascensions to decide whether or not such experiences are evidence of a supreme being or its equivalent. Another definition in Webster’s is that “heaven” refers to “a place or state of supreme happiness.” The Westerners, as we have seen, commonly reported experiences of happiness or joy extending to deep ecstasy and union while in the Upper World. Also, according to Webster’s, a feature of “heaven” is that it is “the place of existence of the blessed after mortal life.” The latter is consistent with the encounters with deceased persons described in Chapters 8, 9, and 10. While the above definitions do not cover all the various phrases ascribed to “heaven” or “heavens” in Webster’s, the characteristics given are consistent with the Westerners being in heavens during their journeys, at least in terms of definitions. Therefore, I shall hereafter speak of them as being in heavens. HEAVENS AND ORGANIZED RELIGION In many Native North American cosmologies, the Lower World is also seen as a heavenly place where one would like to go after death. This, however, is not the declared view of many of the world’s Great Religions, whose adherents number into the billions and among whom the lower realms are commonly portrayed as hells of suffering where people fear going upon death. Such a portrayal ranges from Christianity in the West to Buddhism in the East. In other words, theologically taught cosmology causes persons not to want to go there—ever. The major organized religions tend to place the heavens in the Upper World. Indeed, the reported ascensions to them by the founders of Great Religions are often the basis of their authority. As Roger Walsh has pointed out, the founders’ experiences preserved in sacred texts resemble shamanic journeys.12 The revelatory details of those ascensions are accepted today by hundred of millions of followers of major religions as a matter of belief. Unlike the founders, the followers are not expected, or sometimes not even permitted, to ascend to those realms except after death, and even then only if they qualify in terms of the tenets of their religion. Since “dead men tell no tales,” it is an airtight theological system that maintains its authority as long as no one, such as a shaman, actually goes to the Upper World and comes back with a report that differs significantly from the official versions. MULTIPLE HEAVENS If we assume the accuracy of the reports by the various founders of world religions of their heavenly experiences, we then have before us evidence of the existence of multiple heavens, heavens that apparently were individually appropriate for the founders. Likewise our Westerners found multiple heavens, each person discovering his or her own. Similarity or uniformity of heavens is not mentioned as a requirement in Webster’s definitions. Indeed, if a “heaven” is to be “heavenly,” it seems only natural that each journeyer would experience a heaven that is perfect for him or her. More fundamentally, as already discussed, all of nonordinary reality is perfectly “tailored” to the person experiencing it. (However, that does not mean that all nonordinary reality, as in the Middle World, is heavenly for that individual.) What seems remarkable is that the Westerners’ heavens, despite their individual characters, commonly shared themes and types of experiences, as we have seen in the case of celestial music and heavenly choirs. (For example, see Chapter 8. It seems reasonable to conclude that the Westerners were accessing heavens, but there is even more evidence to support this view, as will be discussed.) THE MYSTERY OF THE INDECIPHERABLE BOOKS AND WRITING Our Westerners report that in their Upper World ascensions sometimes they find themselves entering a temple, as in the following case of a person who had never been in the Upper World before and did not know what to expect. On this particular occasion, the visitor saw there a monk writing. He found this “really interesting” but decided to go on. A MONK WRITING IN A GLORIOUS ROOM I started by going up a waterspout that I had seen when on a ship in the South Pacific. I entered the spout and went up into darkness and then went around the sun for a little while.… I went up through a cloudlike resistance, the barrier to the Upper World. I was glad that I didn’t find St. Peter and the gates of Heaven, because I might have been disappointed. Instead, it was a large wat [Buddhist temple], like one might find in Thailand. I entered this huge temple, into this grand room. It was gold-plated and just glorious. I went into this study and there was a little Tibetan.type monk studying. He was writing. I found this really interesting and wondered what relationship, if any, I had to him. I decided that I should keep going. Then the drum sounded the return signal. So I whizzed back really fast, retracing all my steps. I came back down the waterspout and jumped onto the ship.13 A BOOK WITH DISAPPEARING ARABIC-LIKE LETTERING The previous report foreshadows this one, in which a Westerner entered a “kind of magician’s laboratory” and unexpectedly saw a large book with Arabic-like lettering that disappeared as he approached it. When I went to the Upper World this morning, I went to the second level and I found a very large city there, with a castle on the edge. I stopped at the edge of the castle wall and climbed up to the first window, which was about two stories up, and there was kind of a ledge there. I climbed through the window into kind of a magician’s laboratory, although I didn’t see a lot of details. I knew it was a laboratory, because there was a Merlin-type figure there, dressed in the robes and peaked hat. And, I think, white hair, but I didn’t notice. I was immediately attracted to a very large book on one of the tables, with what looked like Arabic lettering. As I approached the book, the lettering disappeared. I quizzed the magician about what was in the book. He didn’t answer, so I progressed onwards up to other levels.14 ON THE SEVENTH LEVEL: ANCIENT SCROLLS WITH INCOMPREHENSIBLE LANGUAGES AND SYMBOLS This person’s teacher took him to what the journeyer sensed to be the seventh level of the Upper World. He had several adventures on that level, including passing through clashing rocks (his only mission). Then he arrived at a huge set of old buildings in white marble that reminded him of the library at Alexandria. By using a third eye that he had been given, he was able to see printing on the scrolls, “but it was in languages and symbols I didn’t understand.” He was told that he was not yet ready to understand what this meant. Here is his report: My teacher took me to a place that I sensed was on the seventh level of the Upper World. There was a box canyon with a steep back wall. Up near the top was a cave-like entrance with huge rocks opening and closing. They were ten to twelve feet tall and hinged at the top. They opened and closed violently and loudly. There were eight sets of them, each about two to three feet deep. Pondered how to get through and asked my teacher, who told me I had to do it on my own, but to trust my intuition. After watching for a while, I noticed a pattern to the openings and by timing my moves just right I could get through. I made it halfway and got out of sync. I was able to find a small hole in the side of the cave to wait in until I could get back into time with the rocks. When I emerged, I was on a large plain and it was so bright I couldn’t see very well. I found a path and walked along it. It was much like Africa. I continued around a curving path and came upon a very old man dressed only in a loincloth and very dark-skinned. I think he was from India. He said nothing, but handed me a beautiful blue eye and I knew it was my third eye. I continued along until I saw a female lion. She said she had a gift for me. It was courage, courage to believe what I see with my third eye. I continued along the path and came to a huge set of buildings in white marble. They looked very old. I thought of the library at Alexandria. I went inside. There was no one. There were benches and tables, and the walls were lined with scrolls of parchment. I took several down, but they appeared blank. I wondered for quite a while how I could get the information and then realized I needed to use the eye I was given. With it, I could see printing on the paper, but it was in languages and symbols I didn’t understand. I asked out loud what this meant and was told I would be able to comprehend it later when I am ready for it. At that point, the return sounded and I left the way I came, except this time it was very easy to get through the clashing rocks.15 FINALLY A BOOK DISPLAYS A WORD The Westerners had never been told of the existence of indecipherable books or writing in the Upper World, or anywhere else. In fact, I must confess that at first I did not ascribe any particular significance to their appearance in reports. Then the following account made me sit up and pay attention. Someone at last was able to read at least one of the words in the otherwise indecipherable books and writings. [The book] is thick and giant—like the old illustrated manuscripts. It is a nice weight, very heavy. I open it. I can’t read it. It has something on it to indicate what the book is, but it is not clear. It is old lettering. I turn the page to find a whole page of real small print, with an illustrated letter at the beginning, like the old books used to have. It is beautiful. Like the stuff I used to print when I was working for a small press. But I can’t read it. So I look back to the teacher; he seems real interested in what I am doing. He is watching me, so I turn the page again. It is just more and more pages, beautiful … I can’t read it. I hold the book real close. I look back at him. He raises his arms like no big deal. I open the book in the middle, the back. It is just the same. The whole book is filled with something, but I just do not get it. It is just not in focus. Can’t concentrate to read it. I ask, should I continue to try to read it? He nods his head. I open the page; turn the page. Something about an island. The word “island” has just come up. I do not know what that means. He shrugs. Should I keep trying? No, I shouldn’t. I close the book. Put it back on the shelf. It just locks in there real snug. I take another book. I open it one third of the way through. It is like a giant photograph that goes right off the edges. It is black—no, it is gray. I have the feeling that I could fall right into it. So, I look back at him. It is a mixed message. What should I do? I think I should close the book. So I close it. He nods—wrong book or something like that. He indicates that I should put it back on the shelf. It was a very strange feeling, like I could have gone right into the book, head over heels. Very strange. A powerful book of some kind. It is like a window. Okay, but that is back on the shelf. I walk back to the teacher. Should I go back and read more? NO. I guess that is enough for now.16 The one word she reported was “island.” To get even a single word from one of these books was a triumph; but what is the significance of the word? First of all, since it was her ascension, I ordinarily would defer to her primacy in deciding on the meaning. However, the journeyer was not available, and I could not restrain my curiosity. I went to the sixteen.volume Encyclopedia of Religion (of which Eliade was editor-in-chief) and looked in the index to see if by any chance there was an entry for “Island.” There was none for “Island,” but there was one for “Islands,” and this is what it said: “Islands as symbols of paradise.”17 That was quite exciting, but I had been looking for “Island,” not “Islands.” This index entry then referred me to a page in another volume. I pulled it out from the bookshelf and opened it to the indicated page. There I saw the heading “Island,” and it was in the encyclopedia’s section titled “Paradise”!18 Paradise! I could hardly believe my eyes. It was as if the question of whether these were really heavens that the Westerners had visited was answered by the heavens themselves. THE HEAVENLY BOOK AND ITS TEACHINGS The Westerners, without foreknowledge that writings of any kind might be part of their ascension experiences, appear to have made a major discovery. The writings and books they encountered in the Upper World may be the Heavenly Book, so named by scholarly authorities such as Geo Widengren. He states, “Few religious ideas in the Ancient Near East have played a more important role than the notion of the Heavenly Tablets or the Heavenly Book.”19 He notes the discovery of tablets or books by Moses as well as by other prophets and holy personages when they ascended to heaven, as recorded in sacred Near Eastern writings from the time of Babylonia onward. Widengren also mentions the theme of seven heavens (“levels”), as in this statement about Moses’s ascension: “According to a Neo-Hebraic description … Moses went up through the seven heavens.…”20 Interestingly, in the Upper World one of our Westerners found indecipherable scrolls on the seventh level (see this page). Among the shamanic Ostyak people of Siberia there is the belief that one’s fate is written on a seven-story mountain by a goddess.21 In other words, prophets, ancients, and other holy persons are recognized as ascending to heavens and encountering the Heavenly Book there. This seems to be another reason to conclude that the Celestia Study Westerners did ascend to heavens, especially since they were not expecting to see writing or books of any kind. We already have seen other evidence, such as heavenly choirs and celestial music, that they were in such realms. Thus the Upper World heavens entered by the Westerners were real, in nonordinary reality, along with appearances of what seems to be the Heavenly Book, consistent with reports of its existence by ancients involved in the founding of some major Near Eastern religions. In summation, these contemporary Westerners, using core shamanic ascension methods, entered heavens and had experiences heretofore generally assumed to be reserved for the founders of Great Religions. These experiences included hearing heavenly choirs and celestial music, entering realms of splendor, meeting deities and the deceased, celestial dismemberment, cosmic union, and the discovery of indecipherable scrolls and books, and finally one displaying the significant word “Island,” as noted above. In conclusion, it appears that the heavens, contemporary or ancient, are not products of imagination but are seen (and heard) in remarkably similar ways by persons thousands of years apart.The reported ancient versions of the Heavenly Book were tablets or scrolls with a variety of emphases (by “ancient,” I refer to pre-Christian, pre-Islamic times). The Tablets of Law given to Moses are one example.22 Starting with ancient Mesopotamia, some other subjects of the Heavenly Book were said to be the following: the Gods, the Mystery of Heaven, the Mystery of Heaven and Earth, Destiny, Wisdom, the Law of Earth and Heaven, Truth, the Secret of Creation and the Causes of the Things, Life, and the Remembrance of Good and Evil Deeds.23 Returning to the case of a Westerner being shown a book with the legible word “Island” displayed, and which turned out to be synonymous with “Paradise,” it would be very interesting to know what was on the unread pages of this book. Ideally future Western shamanic presentations of the Heavenly Book will occur and shed light on its contents. THE LOWER WORLD REVISITED: HEAVENLY GLIMPSES For readers who might still wonder whether the Westerners were “preprogrammed” to find what their culture had taught them to expect when they ascended to the Upper World, it is instructive to provide some instances of what they found in the Lower World. In other words, did they find a hell or hells? First, in their descents, Westerners encountered much more in the Lower World than meetings with power animals, as described in Chapter 6. Despite the fact that we have not yet been able to make a diligent Netheria Study of the Lower World, for decades I have known that: (1) the Lower World tends to be denser and less ethereal for Westerners; and (2) statistically speaking, animal forms are more abundant in the Lower World, while human forms are more abundant in the Upper, although both can be found in either world. As a preview of a planned Netheria Study, in the following pages one can see some important similarities between the Upper and Lower Worlds. In just the few following examples, the Westerners found, among other things, a heavenlike environment (a “Garden of Eden”), a teacher who is a Christian saint, a possible Heavenly Book, and the sound of music, as in the next report. A TREMENDOUS SOUND OF MUSIC I started out moving rather rapidly, not really through a tunnel, but I came to a man with a seal [membrane] right at first. I couldn’t figure it out so I simply bled through the seal. I found myself traveling in darkness and then suddenly many arches and ridges and underground streams. I just sort of moved around in those for a while. I found myself in a molten place. Suddenly there came a tremendous sound of music. It was not vocal but tonal, rather like beams, like a harmony. It was a tremendous harmony of vibration, of atomic structure. It went from minute to incredibly huge, massive. In the molten place, the only way I could travel on through was on the tone, a single tone, to get into a greater harmony. I seemed to come to a central sun or core that became a heartbeat and a harmonic sound that stretched outward in all directions. It was almost as if I became the Earth, the sun, and the stars and the moon. It was almost as if there was an inner sound that I was connected to—a cosmic sound, and they speak to one another. It was both beyond and in my heartbeat. I returned very rapidly. A couple of times I was flying through vapor and then found myself standing on the other side of the seal. I had some time in the tunnel. I was back.24 IN THE GARDEN OF EDEN … I am in an empty field. A hole in the ground opens up, and I “fall” into it. I fall down into a place I feel I have been before … only this time, instead of there being only skeletons and rocks and a river of fire … it is as if everything is “on” … it is lush; the animals and the people walking around are stunningly beautiful … and very diverse, all different types of animals, all different races of peoples. Everyone is perfect … I realize I am in the Garden of Eden. And this time, while I know I am a “foreigner” here, I do not feel like I am standing out … people are talking to me, and nodding, and smiling. The air is fragrant, with clove and ginger spices, and warm. I feel very, very comfortable. An incredibly beautiful woman, with long auburn hair flowing past her waist, brings me an incredible golden-ish elixir to drink. I take it eagerly and drink it. It is the most wonderful thing I have ever tasted … warm, thick, like honey-sweetish, and nourishing. I feel stronger as I drink it, and incredibly sensual. It is very, very powerful … it almost feels like a drug. Next, this same woman leads me to sofa-chair made from plant boughs and asks me to sit. As I sink into the softness of the chair, it envelops my body perfectly and I feel as if I am in a cocoon. I am instantly dreaming I am a white horse, large, powerful, strong, and I am running very fast through time/space … everything is a blur. I feel incredibly powerful, as if I could run forever. After some time running, I come to a beach with bleached white sand and azure blue water. I drink the water, for I am thirsty and know it is okay to drink. The water tastes like a milder version of the earlier drink I was given, just less thick. I fall into a deep sleep. When I awake, my animal is sitting next to me, licking me all over, washing me gently with her roughish tongue … over and over. She leads me back to my pool of water, and I bathe further, cleansing myself. Then I know it is time to return.25 MEETING A TEACHER: SAINT FRANCIS Teachers were sometimes encountered in the Lower World. The following is from a taped interview with a man whose mother—a Latina Catholic—was dying. He wished, with her approval, to introduce her to nonordinary reality as preparation for her passing. He told his mother to look for an animal, the standard beginning exercise into the Lower World. Instead she met Saint Francis, the patron saint of animals! His account is supplemented by information I obtained through a subsequent interview. My mom became terminally ill with cancer. Towards the last four to five months she realized that she was going to die. She was under a great deal of pain, and none of the painkillers were working. My brother made an offer to teach her how to take journeys. She accepted it very readily. She was psychic as a child but began to lose her powers as she got older. At this time she was in so much pain, she welcomed anything to get out of it. The first time she made a journey she went through the tunnel and she described the tunnel very vividly. She described the elements of the tunnel going out into this beautiful landscape. She had a little seat there where she would sit down and wait for an animal to come. No one came the first time, the first journey, or in the second journey. On the third journey, a figure finally showed. Instead of an animal, it was Saint Francis. It wasn’t her favorite saint, although (being Catholic) she knew about him. Apparently this was her helper. He never talked to her in words; he talked to her through the mind. She just knew what he was saying. She made more journeys, and she knew the moment she got out of the tunnel she would have to sit down in this little seat and wait for him. She wrote down very distinctly everything that she experienced. Saint Francis came many times and just touched her, and she would also touch his vestments … Other saints came whose names I didn’t know. She kept going on these journeys, and I think in one of the journeys there were two other saints that were also going to be her helpers. They started to say that it might be time for her to go and look (at what was beyond?). She kept saying, “When?” Saint Francis kept telling her, “It isn’t time yet.” On one of the later journeys, Saint Francis came and finally decided to take her farther on through that beautiful, beautiful landscape. But every time she went, she cried because she didn’t want to come back. He took her and they both floated toward this beautiful landscape and she wound up on the edge of a ravine. She saw all these figures in vestments lined up, standing on the other side of this ravine. This was a sanca [Spanish for large ravine], so they could not meet. It was so wide at first that she didn’t distinguish anyone. Any time [in ordinary reality] that her illness got very painful, Saint Francis asked her to go back [to where she journeyed]. She got so used to this, she could make it through the tunnel in a split second and out into the other side. She knew she would have to sit there and wait. Sometimes she waited and Saint Francis didn’t come. But most of the time he did come and take her to the ravine again. Each time the ravine was narrower and narrower, and finally she could distinguish individuals on the other side. She saw my little brother who was deceased; he was poisoned when he was two years of age. He was waiting there, and she saw my grandfather and my father and some other relatives whom she couldn’t distinguish. She had been very close to this child (my little brother) and my grandfather. They were just stretching their hands out, wanting her to cross. My mother had a strong desire to go close to the child, and my grandfather was smiling at her. This went on for many, many journeys until she noticed that the sanca kept getting smaller and smaller, although at times it got larger. Toward the very end, a month before she died, the chasm was almost not there. She could almost walk through it, cross it. After that she didn’t want to journey anymore; she didn’t have the energy. She went into a coma for a month (before she passed away). She wrote in great detail all these experiences.26 AN INDECIPHERABLE BOOK IN THE LOWER WORLD While the old Babylonian and Iranian writings refer only to ascending to the Heavenly Book, the ancient Egyptians wrote of descending to the book and finding it in an underground chamber.27 The following Westerner had a variety of adventures in the Lower World until finally she encountered an indecipherable book, quite similar to those discovered in the Upper. I went to the Lower World … When I got there, my power animal met me—it is Buffalo [Bison] … He had me ride upon his back. I was sitting on his back and we were walking out over the prairies and I realized I was wearing the clothing and headdress of a Native American chief. Although I was riding on the back of Buffalo, I was carrying a long staff that I was placing upon the ground with each step he took. We came to an overlook and there we took in the entirety of the plains that lay below us. He took a leap and we were soaring through the air and out into space. We were dancing among the stars and then returned to the edge of the prairie. We were once again walking upon the ground and going up into a heavily wooded area. I loved and admired Buffalo very much and was so proud to be on his back. At a clearing in the woods, I dismounted. Then I had the alarming understanding that I was meant to kill my good friend the Buffalo. I was very resistant. My mind kept saying, “No, no, I cannot do this,” but at the same time I knew I must. It was a deep knowing. I was very cognizant of both ordinary reality and nonordinary reality—it was like I was conscious in both. I was crying in OR, but experiencing NOR.I dismounted from Buffalo and stood looking him in the eye. I stroked his head and apologized. He seemed to understand. I took my staff, which had a blade on the end of it, and I plunged it into Buffalo. As he lay dead, I cut him open and removed his heart and liver. I knew I must eat them but I was fighting it. I kept saying, “No, no, I cannot do this.” But I had a deeper knowing that I must. I ate the organs raw. Then I put his head on over mine and I donned his skin. We merged. I became Buffalo, but I had my own mind. I was walking and could feel all four of my feet stepping on the ground. I could feel the deep, deep, powerful wisdom that I knew was Buffalo’s. It was a very powerful and emotionally moving feeling. As I walked along, I wondered if this was the next form of life in our universe—the merging of human and animal. I walked to the edge of a rock overlook and began striking my feet upon the rocks. This action sent sparks leaping out each time I struck my feet. I was looking out in the distance where the sparks were going and I wondered why I was doing this. I wondered if the sparks would land and a new life form would spring up. As I was watching intently to see the purpose of the sparks, one opened up a wormhole in space, and I was traveling through it at a very fast speed. It was colored with hues of orange, yellow, and white. It was a very long tube and when I finally came out at the other end, I was standing in front of a pedestal with a very, very large leather-bound book upon it. The book was open and there was writing on the pages. I was looking very intently at the book to see what was written upon the parchment pages.Although there was writing on the pages, it was of such a style that my mind could not focus on it—it was totally unrecognizable. I did understand that it was extremely important and also that I was not supposed to be able to read it. I was just to know that it was there. [Emphasis supplied.] At that moment I was sucked back into the wormhole. On the way back, the drumming call-back occurred. When I returned to ordinary reality, I had tears running down my face.28 While it is impossible to know if this was the Heavenly Book, it certainly fits the description of the indecipherable books and scrolls of the Upper World and the one that displayed the word “Island.” That the Lower World shares much with the Upper has long been found in my work with Westerners, and the few Lower World examples given here and in Chapter 6 are consistent with that observation. Still, the two worlds tentatively appear distinct in certain respects, and a thorough Netheria Study is needed in this regard. THE UPPER AND LOWER WORLDS CONSIDERED The Westerners in our study, following the instructions (reproduced in Appendix B) for accessing the Lower World, sometimes encountered quite heavenly realms below. Contrary to cultural expectations, they did not find the Lower World to resemble the Christian hell, but rather the opposite. Many later said that upon dying they would prefer to go down rather than up, based upon the knowledge they had gained for themselves through core shamanic journeying. Their reports cast additional doubt on any argument that the Westerners’ experiences in the Upper and Lower Worlds were merely products of cultural projection.As noted earlier, in some traditional Native North American cosmologies, the Lower World is seen as a heavenly place where one would like to go after death—contrary to the declared view of many of the world’s Great Religions. Due to the widespread influence of such religious teachings, many of the remaining indigenous shamans, such as in those Mongolia, have become reluctant even to try to descend to the Lower World.29 Possibly the closest thing to hell is in our own world, the Middle World, with all its pain and suffering. Those who journey to the Upper and Lower Worlds virtually never report finding pain there, even if they undergo dismemberments. Pain is not found in heavens. Among some indigenous peoples of the South American tropical forest, there is a myth about a time long ago when heaven and earth were connected by a vine that they could climb and descend at will. Due to various unfortunate circumstances, the vine became severed, and only the shamans were still able to visit heaven. Then the people lost their last shaman. They lament that it is impossible to visit heaven anymore. Now in our daily lives, the methods of core shamanism give us the freedom to go to both the Upper and Lower Worlds and learn for ourselves what is there. In doing so, individuals discover for themselves that there are heavens beyond this Middle World. Heavens are real, but they are real in another reality, the reality accessed by shamans to help and heal others. SPIRITUAL FREEDOM AND FUTURE Shamanism, including shamanic ascension, is a path of independence leading toward spiritual freedom. By spiritual freedom, I mean freedom to know, not just to believe. No longer will it be possible to stop that personal independence by confiscating shamans’ drums. Their sound is now available electronically almost everywhere in the world, and the shaman’s drum is the ballot box of spiritual freedom. The sound of that drum can again carry us back and forth through the barriers to the heavens, barriers that we hope will never impede us again. Today in core shamanism, we have the tools to seek help from another reality. Awaiting us in those heavens are the teachers, wise and caring spirits forever ready to heal and share their knowledge, wisdom, and compassion to help us solve the problems of our lives and the world, and to prepare for a better destiny. To solve these problems may seem to many an impossible enterprise. Yet there now is immeasurable help available to address difficulties that “could only be solved by a miracle.” The time is coming for shamanism to enter the human center stage, for miracles are needed, and miracles are the work of shamans. The miracle of the unbound shaman is a worthy lesson. Just as the spirits can miraculously unbind the shaman, so can they liberate humanity from its limiting bindings of belief and disbelief. By freeing ourselves from those bindings, we can avail ourselves of the knowledge, wisdom, and help of the teachers and other compassionate spirits. We no longer are restricted to the teachings of Heavenly Books brought to us by the ancient few, for now the many can travel to the sacred origins of the teachings themselves. Like a spiritual Liberty Bell, the shaman’s drum declares the start of a spiritual revolution, however long it may take. The severed vine to the heavens has been restored. Also restored is the way below, down the metaphoric roots of the vine to realms long denied. AFTERWORD The Cave Again Walter Cline said something more about power quests. He reported that the Salish Okanagan people made paintings on rock walls of the spirits they had encountered there.1 Why did they make the paintings? The Okanagan elders explained to Cline that “people with strong power” made them as “a kind of advertisement” and “in some vague way” the paintings “assisted the painter to employ his power.”2 The representations were only of “strong creatures.”3 Cline added that children might visit rock paintings in search of power.4 Fathers commonly sent their children alone on power quests to paintings they had made many years earlier. The fathers generally seemed only to give clues about the “power paintings” (my term) and their locations, rather than speaking directly to their sons about them.5 Yet, in one case noted earlier, a father “let his son down by a rope to a cave in a cliff and pulled him up the next morning. During the night in the cave, the boy got Story Rock power, which protected him from all harm.”6 “Story rock” is a term sometimes used by Native North Americans in the West to refer to rocks having paintings. In this case they were also noted as having power. In any event, in these Okanagan instances the intention was to help the children find a protective spirit, ideally one of a father.7 Perhaps it is not coincidental that some twenty-six thousand years ago and on the opposite side of the Earth in France, a child’s footprints were permanently embedded in the now-hardened mud floor of the Upper Paleolithic cave of Chauvet, whose walls are covered with paintings of animals.8 In addition, a survey of footprints in a variety of Upper Paleolithic painted caves concluded that almost all of them were of children.9 The Okanagan elders may have gifted the world with missing links to a greater understanding of the purposes of the ancient cave paintings of Europe. And why were the Okanagan children on power quests given only indirect clues about their fathers’ paintings and their location? I cannot speak for the Okanagan, nor for people twenty-six millennia ago, but it was traditional knowledge among the Shuar not to tell what you encountered in such a quest until very old. I am now eighty-three, so earlier in this book I told you what happened in the cave when I went questing.In a sense, this book constitutes my own cave painting for others who come this way, to give them clues for their own power quests. Yet these have only been words. It is up to you, the reader, to enter the hidden reality of spirits and encounter the real thing. APPENDIX A Ascending to the Upper World to Compare Experiences This is an invitation to readers to ascend to the Upper World themselves, to “go over the rainbow,” following essentially the same instructions that were given to the Westerners in the Celestia Study. (See Appendix C for useful resources to help your ascensions.) This opportunity is part of the spiritual freedom that shamanism offers. If you are new to shamanic journeying, this is a chance for you to see how your own Upper World experiences compare to those described for the Westerners in these pages. I have found that generally about 90 percent of Westerners can ascend to the Upper World if they seriously follow the instructions. And the other 10 percent? There is no formal study of them, but “left brain” types such as engineers and lawyers often seem to have the most difficulty! Since you presumably are now familiar with what is in this book, or have done shamanic journeywork before, you cannot be considered a “naïve” journeyer. So I suggest that you find a few friends who: (1) have not read or heard about the contents of Cave and Cosmos, and (2) are willing to experiment. Without telling them about the nature of the Upper World experiences reported in these pages, just give them the methodological instructions for shamanic ascension provided here. Ask them to report what experiences they have after doing some of the exercises. In the spirit of core shamanism, remember to let them interpret their own journeys. Then share the results, discuss them, and arrive at your own conclusions. If you are already an experienced practitioner of shamanic journeying and have kept a record of your ascensions to the Upper World, you can simply compare the ascension experiences in this book with your own. Following are the instructions as they were given to students and other Westerners prior to ascensions to the Upper World. They were part of the standard curriculum of the Foundation for Shamanic Studies’ “Basic Workshop, The Way of the Shaman.”® I had originated, researched, and experimented with these instructions prior to furnishing them to Foundation faculty members as part of their training to teach the Basic Workshop. They were requested to adhere to them as closely as possible, so that all students could have the same methodological knowledge when they took more advanced workshops and courses from any faculty member in North America or abroad. Although the precise words naturally somewhat varied each time, this chapter presents what all Foundation faculty members, starting with myself, have taught for many years regarding the methods of going to, and working in, the Upper World. The faculty members were given strict rules not to tell students anything more about the Upper World than what is in the following instructions. FIRST VISIT TO THE UPPER WORLD Although you are being given ways for ascending to get knowledge and help, the actual experiences resulting from using the methods are yours alone. Do not be surprised if these experiences are often awesome and moving, causing you to experience ineffable joy and tears of happiness. It is no accident that some indigenous peoples call this “the crying way.” Such experiences are manifestations of deep shamanic ecstasy. There is no need to be frightened or worried when journeying “outside of time,” away from the Middle World where we live. You will discover that you are entering realms far more loving and compassionate than the Middle World. In the Middle World, pain and suffering are common. We have long since discovered that pain is not found outside the Middle World. Often I am asked by beginning students to describe the differences between the Lower and Upper Worlds. This I always decline to do, for if I told them and they believed me, we would be starting a religion, not practicing shamanism. In practicing shamanism, the authority belongs to the individual. You need to learn the cosmography of the Upper World yourself through experience. No one else can really tell you where the spiritual beings and resources are specifically located in nonordinary reality. This is something you alone must discover through personal practice. My intention is to give you only the minimum of help. In shamanic cultures, which commonly lacked writing, the accumulation of journey knowledge required great mnemonic discipline, or recall training, as well as constant journey practice. Continual practice is important for us too, but we have the advantage of being able to take notes after our journeys rather than simply depending upon memory alone. Also, we can record accounts during our journeys with the “simultaneous narration” method (described later in this section). Such techniques can enrich and speed your knowledge of the cosmology of nonordinary reality. If you use this book for learning the methods of shamanic journeying, it is very important that you follow the instructions in the order they are given, and that you achieve success in each exercise, preferably more than once, before going on to the next. I originated the instructions for shamanic journeying based on my decades of research and teaching, and I have used them in personally training many thousands of people in shamanism, including those I trained to become faculty members of the Foundation for Shamanic Studies. Ideally, you should try to do each exercise before reading the examples of the experiences of others doing it. That way you will be able to compare your own experiences to those of others without wondering if you have been influenced by their accounts. The shamanic journey in most indigenous societies is undertaken with the aid of monotonous percussion sound, especially drumming. Utilizing the sound of drumming for the shamanic journey, either with a live drum or with a shamanic-journey drumming recording, requires a journeyer to be centered and able to maintain concentration and purpose. Persons who are not centered or mentally and emotionally “together” cannot maintain the discipline necessary for journeying with auditory driving. Without centeredness, it is just drumming and nothing more. Accordingly, this method is exceptionally safe. Most drummed shamanic journeys, including those done by shamans in Siberia, are less than half an hour long, and one can return at any time without waiting for the drumming to stop. Indeed, the continuous drumming also supports a return journey. Even if you should forget to come back when the drumming signals you to return, you will just drift back anyway, since the drumming will no longer continue to support you in the other reality. In many ways, shamanic journeying is safer than dreaming, for the journeyer can return whenever she or he likes. PREPARING FOR YOUR ASCENT You will shortly have your first opportunity to visit the Upper World. Be sure you thoroughly understand the following instructions before you start. To carry out this initial exercise, you can use a shamanic.drumming recording (see “Departing the Middle World,” this page). Wait until you are calm and relaxed before undertaking this or any other shamanic journey. Avoid consciousness-altering substances, including alcohol, during the preceding twenty-four hours, so that your power of concentration will be good and your mind clear. Be sure you feel rested and awake. Otherwise you might fall asleep to the relaxing sound of the shamanic drumming. Turn off any telephones, doorbells, pagers, or wristwatch alarms, so that you will not be disturbed. Remove your shoes, loosen your clothing, and lie comfortably on the floor or a bed. If you are a regular practitioner of a meditative discipline such as yoga and accustomed to sitting for such a purpose, you may prefer that position instead. Darken the room as much as possible, and place a bandana or kerchief across your eyes.The most important thing about your body position is that it should be one that most easily allows you to leave your body behind—in other words, a position that does not require you to divert part of your consciousness to maintaining some posture in ordinary reality. For this reason, persons in our culture, as well as in some indigenous ones, as in parts of Native western North America, prefer the lying position. In Siberia and areas adjacent to it, a sitting or standing position is usually preferred. In the latter case, the standing position may be augmented with body movement that usually includes additional percussion sound from bells and other metal objects worn by the shaman. SIMULTANEOUS NARRATION If you wish to maximize the effects of journeying to the sound of recorded drumming, you may want to try simultaneous narration, a technique I developed in the early 1980s whereby one talks out loud describing a journey from start to finish, as it occurs. Even when nothing is happening, the journeyer should keep talking, if only to say, “Nothing is happening.” One will soon get tired of repeating this phrase; at that point, things usually do begin to occur. To further increase the value of simultaneous narration, one may wish to talk into a lapel microphone attached to a recording device (a separate unit from the player that is providing the drumming sound). In this way, your simultaneous narration of the journey is preserved and can subsequently be reviewed by you to make notes of details you might have forgotten. Furthermore, your recordings can be kept in a permanent archive of your experiences. This is useful, because earlier journeys often assume new significance as you progress in your understanding, and you may wish to review them. Simultaneous narration greatly focuses one’s attention and thereby can result in a journey more vivid than one without it, and often even stronger than one done with live drumming. If you are journeying to a live drum, however, simultaneous narration is not a practical technique, for the sound of the drum will interfere with making a clear voice recording. Whether or not you do simultaneous narration, after any journey, review your experiences and make notes about them for future reference. The above methods are part of the basis for a Foundation course named “Harner Shamanic Counseling Training.” LIVE DRUMMING If a live drum is used, advise the drummer to beat the drum in a monotonous, moderately loud, and rapid tempo. The volume of the drumbeats and the intervals between them should be unvarying. A drumming tempo of approximately 205 to 220 beats per minute is usually optimal for most journeying. The style and speed of the drumming can be best ascertained by listening to a drumming CD or MP3 produced by the Foundation for Shamanic Studies. Lengthy, monotonous, shamanic-journey drumming can be hard work, but the drummer should try to do it for fifteen minutes (ten minutes is usually not quite good enough). At the end of the fifteen minutes, the drummer should strike the drum with four short rolls to signal that it is time for you to get ready to come back. Then the drummer should beat the drum very rapidly (significantly faster than the 205-to 220-beat range) for about half a minute for your return journey, and finally beat four more short rolls to signal that you should now be back in the room. With practice, the drummer should find it easier to provide a fifteen.minute journey without tiring. With recorded journey drumming on a CD, you do not have to be concerned about your drummer becoming tired, so you can journey for as long as thirty minutes, if you desire. If you want a fifteen-minute journey, simply select the fifteen-minute track on the CD. The drumming CD for journeying, like others I developed starting in 1980, has the proper tempo and drumming call-back signals described above. They also have the advantage of controlling the regularity and volume of the individual drumbeats. These are available from the Foundation for Shamanic Studies website. (For more information, see Appendix C.) DEPARTING THE MIDDLE WORLD Put on your earphones. Connect them to one of the recommended Shamanic Journeying and Drumming CDs/MP3s (see Appendix C) on a CD player or on a computer, iPod, or other MP3 player. Cover your eyes with a bandana or kerchief to exclude light. Rest there quietly for a few minutes and consider how you will start your ascent. Before beginning to journey to the Upper World, it is very important that you, like an indigenous shaman, select as a departure site a place in the Middle World (that is, on the Earth’s surface) where you have seen yourself in ordinary reality at some time in your life. It may be a place you can see today outside your window, or it may be a site you visited years ago. The important thing is that you know its approximate location here in the Middle World and that you can visualize it to some degree. It is not enough simply to close your eyes and visualize any departure point without knowing from firsthand experience that it is located in the Middle World. Without this discipline, journeyers can be confused about what world and level they are starting from and where they are arriving. Experienced shamans map accurately by having permanent Middle World departure points. It does not matter how long ago you last saw the Middle World departure site in ordinary reality; nor does it matter whether the place today still looks in ordinary reality as you remember it. In shamanic terms, what you are seeing is the spirit of the place, and that endures regardless of any subsequent ordinary-reality changes. Once you have selected a departure site, try to keep using it indefinitely for ascension. By repeatedly using the same departure place, you will find it increasingly easy to visualize the start of your visionary journey. The gradual repetition also triggers ever-deeper stages of the shamanic state of consciousness (SSC). In other words, the familiarity of this initial routine in itself is important in changing consciousness and in moving into increasingly vivid experiences. Growing familiarity with these first routes from the departure site permits one to make faster journeys and have more time in the Upper World. Remember the classic indigenous shamanic departure points described earlier, but do not feel restricted to them. Some contemporary New York City journeyers, for example, do not necessarily have vivid connections with mountains, trees, or even fireplaces. Therefore they may choose to jump up from the top of a skyscraper, such as the Empire State Building, which they can clearly visualize from their everyday experience. While this can be a successful departure place for them, obviously we will not find examples of its use in the literature on Siberian shamanism. The important thing is not whether the departure location is human-made or natural, but that it is a place, not some moving object (such as a bird, airplane, or rocket in flight), and that you have seen it firsthand in ordinary reality.A departure point, whether a mountain, tree, or something else, does not necessarily have to reach to the sky, but it should be higher than its surroundings. An example comes to mind from a couple of decades ago. A small team from the Foundation for Shamanic Studies was visiting the Caribou Eskimo (Inuit) northwest of Hudson Bay, and one of their young men came to us to learn shamanic methods, since the missionaries had prohibited and essentially wiped out shamanism and shamanic healing in his community. We instructed him in basic journey techniques only so that he could learn all the rest directly from the spirits. There were no trees or mountains there on the tundra, so he chose as his departure point to visit the Upper World a low rounded hill on an island near his village. Although it was not even a high hill, he was successful in using it, since it still was above the surrounding flat terrain. The important point in selecting a departure place is finding one that works for you. For some, as an illustration, it is a tree. USING A TREE In a relaxed and unhurried way, consider trees that you have personally seen in ordinary reality. Pick a relatively tall one for which you have felt a special kinship. It could be in your backyard right now, or it may be one you saw years ago elsewhere. Again, you should have seen it firsthand and know the approximate location. It does not matter if the tree has since fallen or been cut down; you are working with the spirit of the tree and that place. As long as you can remember that tree and its location, you can use it as a reliable departure site for the Upper World. Try to glimpse the tree with your eyes closed or covered. If you do not even get a faint glimpse of the tree, do not be discouraged. You may be more kinesthetic and need to feel yourself climbing rather than seeing the climb. With practice, there is a good chance that you will later start to see it as well. Then start to climb it. Avoid preconceptions about where the top of the tree will end. The tree may continue all the way into the Upper World, or you may reach its top right away, long before you get out of the Middle World. In the latter case, simply jump up from it. You may see just the tree as you climb, as you would in ordinary reality; or you may see yourself, as an outside observer, climbing the tree. Both of these types of experiences are valid. The latter I call an “out-of-spirit” experience, for, from a shamanic point of view, one portion of your spirit or soul is climbing the tree while another portion observes it. This experience is one type of the doppelgänger effect known in the shamanic literature; i.e., the experience of being in two places at the same time. Most persons, however, do not start experiencing the doppelgänger until they have done more work. USING A CHIMNEY The old European chimney technique of departure, noted earlier, is often a popular one today, because most of us can visualize some fireplace that we know or remember, often with fond memories. Try to visualize it, whether or not a fire was burning there. When you undertake the journey to the Upper World, enter the fireplace and move up the dark chimney. From the top of the chimney you may find yourself in a cloudlike tunnel, or rising into the open sky, sometimes seeing the Earth below you. USING A MOUNTAINTOP Select a mountain that you have visited firsthand in ordinary reality and whose summit you have seen, even if only at a distance. Visualize yourself at the crest, and jump up from its summit. USING A RAINBOW To use a rainbow to depart for the Upper World, visualize one you have seen somewhere during your life. It may have been a full arc or a half.rainbow. Either way, visualize the rainbow as you remember it at the place you saw it in ordinary reality. When you journey, start up where the rainbow leaves the earth, climb it, and jump upward from its zenith. YOUR MISSION Now state the mission to yourself three times so that you do not forget its purpose. This mission statement is important for successful shamanic journeying. State it to yourself several times before starting. For this first time, I suggest: “My mission is to go to the Upper World to explore it until I am called back by the drum.” If you are using the simultaneous.narration technique with a lapel microphone and tape or other recording device, you can record your mission intention by dictating aloud. Turn on the shamanic drumming. PASSING FROM ORDINARY TO NONORDINARY REALITY, THE FIRST BARRIER Now review the earlier discussion of the first barrier or transition zone between OR and NOR, and methods of crossing it (this page). Follow the instructions there, listening for several minutes to recorded or live journey drumming. Then, in a darkened room, with your eyes closed and covered, continue to listen to the drumming, and visualize your pre.selected departure point. Whatever the departure place, remember how it looked. For example, if the site is a fireplace, enter it and rise on the flames; if there was no fire, just enter the fireplace and go up the dark, empty flue. Now you are making the transition from OR to NOR. This constitutes crossing the first barrier. Keep on ascending the chimney and then beyond. As mentioned earlier, sometimes there is a kind of cloud tunnel that continues beyond the chimney. Other times there is no tunnel and one simply rises, perhaps seeing the landscape of the Earth receding below. If you choose a tree, mountaintop, or skyscraper as your departure point, simply jump up or rise from the top. You should have no difficulty ascending, for these are journeys of the spirit, and your spirit is not constrained by the gravitational forces of ordinary reality. PASSING THE SECOND BARRIER Traveling upward is not enough in itself to reach the Upper World. Even if you find yourself high above the Earth, you are still in the Middle World unless you have passed through the barrier between worlds. Without transcending it, you are still in the Middle World, even if you go out of our solar system and to other galaxies, for what astronomers see is still only the Middle World. As you continue ascending, it is very important to pass through the barrier to the Upper World so that you can be completely sure that you have reached it. Usually one encounters this barrier fairly soon. Normally it is not an obstacle but simply a permeable transition zone, such as a cloud layer or membrane. If a membrane, its thinness often is almost like a sheet of paper, although it is a sheet that extends as far as one can see. Usually the zone is so permeable that you can go through it simply by focusing your will. Very rarely the barrier will be resistant to your passing. Even then you may find a hole or opening in the barrier zone through which you can pass. Avoid becoming tense if you do not transcend the zone right away. Keep trying in a relaxed but determined manner. Success in journeying depends on a combination of effortless persistence and relaxed concentration. Do not feel discouraged if your first journey is faint; it will change with practice. Also, imagery may occur either in black-and.white or in color. IN THE UPPER WORLD THE FIRST LEVEL OF THE UPPER WORLD Once you pass through the barrier or transition zone, you are on the first level of the Upper World. Take this opportunity to begin getting acquainted with it. You can explore in any direction on the first level, or you may prefer to go up to another level and explore there. Each level has its own minor barrier or transition zone, which may manifest as another cloud layer or other permeable divider. Wherever you decide to go, remember the route you are taking and the sequence of things you see. This facilitates your return to the Middle World from which you departed, as well as a return to these same Upper World places in future journeys.When you are using the simultaneous-narration method, keep describing what is happening throughout your journey. The important thing is to keep on talking, because describing what you see and what you experience strengthens the vividness of your journey, which can appear in black-and-white or in color. As I said before, if you do not see anything, keep saying, “Nothing is happening.” With such boring repetition, things usually start to change and you begin seeing. THE SECOND LEVEL AND ABOVE IN THE UPPER WORLD If you wish to continue on to the second level of the Upper World, simply journey upward again. This time, since you are already journeying in spirit, it normally is easier to ascend to the next level. There are more levels above the second one that you can explore if you have drumming time and wish to do so. Each one is reached after passing through another barrier or transition zone. Again, these zones may appear like cloud layers, membranes, tissue paper, or something similar. Each level is, in a sense, almost a world in itself, with much for you to discover in all directions, so do not feel you have to rush your travels. You can always make additional journeys to a particular level whenever you desire. In core shamanism, there is no “official” number of levels in the Upper World. Cross-cultural reports on the number of levels vary considerably, and therefore the number is not a core aspect of shamanism. In tribes among whom I lived in the Amazon, people rarely needed to count beyond the five fingers on their hand, since money, tribute, and taxes had not yet become part of their lives. Any number beyond five was usually just “many.” Accordingly, among the shamans there, only a few levels were usually counted. In contrast, shamans in the Central Asian regions of Tuva and Mongolia reported the greatest number of levels when they lived close to major civilizations where extensive counting had long since been part of the cultures. Statements about the number of levels and their characteristics are thus not part of core shamanic methods but rather conclusions that shamanic journeyers gradually draw as they progress in their firsthand investigations. The landscapes and levels you are shown in journeys are your working cosmography, a cosmography that is perfect for you. That is what matters to the shamanic journeyer. In your journeys, keep track not only of your departure point, but also the number of levels through which you pass. There is a membrane or cloud layer separating each level. With practice you will gradually become acquainted with the sequences of levels, what is to be found on them, and under what circumstances. Also, on any level there are “veils” that may be drawn aside, depending on your mission and what the spirits feel should be revealed to you at that time. It may seem that I have told you too little about what to expect on the various levels. That is intentional, for I am attempting only to teach you a method. The actual discoveries of what is there are yours. That is the nature of the autonomy of shamanic work. In fact, once while I was teaching some Russians, an outstanding Siberian shaman who was present told me that I was “telling too much” about journeying, even though he agreed with the accuracy of what I had said. RETURNING FROM THE UPPER WORLD When it is time to descend from the Upper World, the drum on the recording will sound four rolls to alert you. The rolls will be followed by a fast return beat. With the help of the beat, immediately come back the way you went up. Do this rapidly, as the return beat is usually only about half a minute long. At the end you should be at your Middle World departure place. If drumming is provided by an assistant rather than a CD, the same procedure is followed. Then, in silence, allow yourself about ten minutes to write down your experiences so that you can remember what you learned and be prepared to compare them with future journeys. Try to remember the place on the first level from which you departed upward, so that you can use it again in future journeys. The repeated use of the same departure or “takeoff” sites in Upper World levels will help you travel more rapidly and more vividly in your future ascents. MORE EXPLORATIONS If you wish, make one or two additional exploration journeys in the Upper World to increase your knowledge before proceeding to the next exercise. By using a drumming CD or other Foundation for Shamanic Studies recording, you can choose to have a preset fifteen-minute or half-hour journey. If live drumming is being done by an assistant, then probably fifteen minutes would be more practical, as noted before. It is usually distracting to attempt to drum for yourself simultaneously while journeying, although some shamans may do it. During one’s first journeys, often the experience is faint and fleeting, and lacks the vividness of what people normally call “reality.” This is to be expected, for when one is just starting to see shamanically, it often takes time to begin to perceive nonordinary reality clearly. Be patient, and you will be rewarded for your efforts. Thus, at first you may find it hard to maintain your concentration at times, for your immersion in the shamanic state of consciousness is not yet well developed. You may find your mind wandering and returning to ordinary-reality preoccupations. Again, be patient and continue practicing. Any spiritual discipline requires time, though one of the remarkable things about shamanic journeying is how rapidly most people succeed in doing it. Not everyone is a natural visualizer, although most are. Other persons may be more kinesthetic and journey primarily through feeling their way. Others, such as many attorneys and mathematicians, report that they seem to “think” their way through their early journeys. Whatever mode of perception you start with, build on it, and in time the other modes of perception can be developed. The most important thing is not to give up. After all, if you did not achieve nirvana in your first few Buddhist meditation sessions, would that mean that you were doomed to failure on that spiritual path? MAPPING YOUR JOURNEYS OF ASCENSION As you make more ascensions, review your accumulating notes, for the different journeys will begin to fall into place like pieces of a cosmic jigsaw puzzle. You will gradually become not just an explorer but also a cosmographer of the Upper World. Careful note-taking and mapping will help your work and expedite your future journeys. If you keep taking notes over the weeks and months, you will have a record of incredible adventures in nonordinary reality. Furthermore, they will be nonfictional, because they really happened to you! In some shamanic populations, such as the Sami and Siberian peoples, maps of what shamans had discovered were painted on the skin surfaces of their drums (see Plates 6 and 7). In our culture, we can also make maps in our notebooks and on large sheets of paper, adding to them as our knowledge increases (see Plates 8 and 9). Some of my students have even made dramatic three-dimensional or sculptural “maps” of their journey discoveries. But even the best maps cannot remotely do justice to the incredible experiences and cosmology awaiting the shamanic journeyer. Do not avoid using your will to journey. The shamanic use of will is analogous to that which one exerts when driving an automobile on new roads in a strange country. As with automobile drivers, shamans use will and intention to travel in a general direction for a particular goal, not knowing in advance what they will specifically see along the way or what incidents will occur. Those who seriously pursue shamanic journeying will discover that there is far more to nonordinary reality than what contemporary Westerners normally call “imagination.” Every journey is in a sense an experiment. Through continued personal experiments, you can eventually conclude for yourself whether your nonordinary experiences are real and capable of providing extraordinary information and help. ADDITIONAL UPPER-WORLD PRACTICE ASCENDING TO A TEACHER FOR HELP Where does one go to find a teacher in heaven? You will have to discover for yourself the exact level on which you discover your teacher or teachers (for you may have more than one) in the Upper World. The teacher may live on the very first level, the second, or higher. This will be your own discovery, part of your accumulation of personal knowledge.Wherever you discover a teacher, remember the level, since that is the surest place to find him or her in future journeys. Shamans know exactly what level their teachers are on and can go back to them there. With discovering the identity and abode of your own spirit teachers, you are getting ready to acquire some of the incredible knowledge and wisdom they possess and are willing to share with you in response to your questions. A common query from people who have not done this divination work is: How can I trust the answers I get? The standards for trust are the same as in ordinary reality to conclude whether a doctor, lawyer, psychotherapist, or any other person is trustworthy; in other words, on the basis of their track records with you. One of the best ways to learn whether your teacher, power animal, or any other spirit is trustworthy is to ignore their advice (although I do not recommend it)! Subsequently you will have ample opportunity to decide whether you made a mistake in not trusting the advice, or in misinterpreting it. You often have a metaphorical answer, in part or in whole, and you must keep in mind that you might not have understood it accurately. A direct way is simply to utilize the answer in your life and see if it is accurate and practical. That is the real test. At the same time, you must remember that the spirits are not giving you orders, only their advice. You must combine their apparent advice with your ordinary-reality “street smarts.” Finally, you have to take responsibility for your actions. When I hear a person justify their actions by saying, “The spirits told me to do it,” I know that he/she does not yet know shamanism, for the helping spirits are our partners, not our bosses. After you have met a spirit teacher and started working with him or her, you may sometimes find the teacher “not at home” in a journey. Do not be discouraged. Teachers are somewhat like full professors who do not always keep their office hours. When the teacher is not at the usual place, it usually means that you are being given permission to seek a second teacher, not as a substitute but as an additional resource for your development. Therefore, if the teacher is not in the usual location, reframe your journey purpose to discover an additional teacher, and continue your journey to find one and ask him or her your question. On other occasions your teacher may be home but refers you to another teacher who is a specialist in addressing the kind of question or problem you pose. Your original teacher may take you to the other teacher or simply indicate where to find him or her. If you are given no specific help on how to find the other teacher, simply set off on your own. Give the teacher a chance. Do not assume that you know better than the Upper World spirits who should be your teacher. Finding a teacher is not like shopping. Work with the teacher on a number of journeys and see what the results are. Then, if you still feel dissatisfied, simply do not go back to that teacher. I must say, however, that I have never heard of a case where a person who works seriously with the teacher is dissatisfied with the results. If your teacher turns out to be a deceased relative who was close to you in ordinary reality, do not be surprised if you feel considerable emotion. You may even find yourself crying. Treasure the experience: you are having an opportunity to renew your connection with a person you never expected to see again. Often these are opportunities for mutual sharing of unfinished business and for discussing things that were not possible before the person died. Shamans in tribal cultures routinely transcend the perceived barrier that separates the living and the dead. For the shaman, there is no finality to what we call death; everything is accessible outside of time. Emotion, whether represented by tears or by joy, is a good sign when one has ascended, for it indicates that one is taking the journey seriously. Beyond this, it may mean that the visitor to the Upper World is experiencing ecstatic spiritual happiness, an almost indescribable state in which one cries and is joyful at the same time. Do not be afraid to occasionally experience fear, for it too is a sign of taking the other reality seriously. Through temporarily experiencing fear, and then discovering there was really nothing to fear, one learns to trust heaven. First Exercise: Asking a Question The quality of your results in seeking knowledge depends primarily upon the spirits and whether you approach them successfully. To prepare for this work, you need to go again to the Upper World. You should use the same departure site to leave the Middle World, ascend, and pass through the barrier or transition zone to arrive in the Upper World. The only thing new is your objective or mission. This new mission must be clear in your mind before your ascent as well as during it. In this first visit to a teacher, I suggest that you plan to ask for information to help solve a problem in your own life. Later, as you gain knowledge for yourself through the divination journeys, you will be in a better position to ask cosmological questions and to help others if they should request it of you. Try to select a question that is personally important. Only you, and you alone, are qualified to decide what is an important question. Likewise, if you are later doing divination journeying for someone else, only that person is qualified to decide what is an important question for him or her. Do not carry out divination journeys about other persons without their permission. This is one of the ethics in shamanism. For a question to be important does not necessarily mean that it has to have cosmic significance. It can be as simple as a question about how to organize your work week. The main issue is whether the question is important to you or, if you are seeking an answer at the request of someone else, important to him or her. Do not judge for others whether their questions are significant.Emphasizing your own important questions when beginning this work focuses your mind and encourages you to keep focused in your journeys. In other words, you are highly motivated to get an answer. Later, when you have done more journey work, you will usually find it easy to get an answer to an almost infinite range of questions. Compose your question unambiguously, for properly framing the question is half the secret of success in divination. Avoid using the words “and” or “or” because you thereby create two parts to the question. If the teacher then answers, you may not know if the first or second part of your question is being addressed. This is especially true if the teacher gives you symbolic answers. Each question should be simple and clear, and normally only one question should be used in each visit to a teacher. An important reason for keeping to your single question is to allow you time to receive additional details during your journey. The teacher may disappear, as has been explained before, but this should not be construed as indicating that the answer is terminated. Whether the teacher remains present or not, he or she has the power (and normally uses it) to manage or direct the events of the rest of your journey. They may be literal or metaphoric aspects of the answer. Nothing is simple, for the teacher may engage in a lengthy dialogue that may cause you to ask more questions as part of the exchange. Furthermore, after answering your initial question or request, sometimes the teacher takes the opportunity of your visit to give you some unrelated information the teacher apparently thinks you should know. Benefit by studying all the events closely. Nothing after meeting the teacher is unimportant. Now please review what you have already learned about how to ascend to the Upper World, including the use of a departure place that you have known in ordinary reality here in our Middle World, having a specific mission in mind before departing, and knowing how to ascend and return. Prepare yourself to seek a teacher. If this is your first attempt, avoid preconceptions about who it will be. Before you depart, repeat your primary mission silently or aloud to yourself: “I want to meet my teacher.” Second, repeat to yourself three times a question that you will ask your teacher. This will be a divination mission, so the question should be important to you. Write it down beforehand in a notebook, if possible; otherwise, repeat it to yourself three times so that you do not forget it.If you are using recorded drumming, then you can choose to employ the simultaneous-narration technique (see this page). If you wish, you can also use a lapel microphone to dictate a running account of your experiences into a recorder. Next, journey up to the first level of the Upper World in the manner you have already learned. This time, when you get there, look around and see if there is anyone who looks human. If you do meet someone in human form, immediately ask him or her, “Are you my teacher?” It is essential to do this in order to be sure that you are talking with your teacher and not just anyone. The being may answer affirmatively or negatively telepathically, in spoken words, by nodding or shaking the head, or by ignoring you. If the person does not indicate that he or she is your teacher, then simply travel on, either on the same level or by going up to the next. Usually it is easy to go up to the second level, since you are already traveling as spirit. Sometimes on the first level one encounters a large white bird that is available to carry travelers up to the second level. This is only a temporary guide, assisting you for this particular purpose. If you do not meet anyone who admits to being your teacher on the second level, then proceed up to the third level, and so on. When someone in human form admits to being your teacher, then ask your question without delay. Pay close attention to what immediately occurs. Generally the first thing the teacher says or does is the core of the answer to the question, even if you do not understand it at the time. Various things can happen next. If the teacher has spoken to you through thoughts or words, you may find yourself in a dialogue. In such a dialogue, stay with the subject of your question rather than trying to bring up unrelated questions. Otherwise you may not know which question the teacher is answering. Remember that you can make another ascension whenever you like in order to ask another question. This is not a once-in-a-lifetime pilgrimage to the oracle at Delphi in ancient Greece. Even with that oracle, the same rule would probably have been appropriate; otherwise you could not be sure to which question the oracle’s answer applies. The teacher may respond not by speaking or by thought communication, but instead by simply motioning in a certain direction, indicating where you should go. Follow the indication and see what you encounter. At this point the teacher sometimes disappears and is not seen again during the entire journey, but do not think that you are not being given an answer. As indigenous shamans know, the teachers (which they may consider deities or sacred ancestors) have incredible powers there, and they usually orchestrate your journey experiences so that you have to learn to “read” them as parts of the answer to your question.If the teacher already has communicated the answer in thoughts or words, then metaphoric or literal scenes that are subsequently shown usually provide details elaborating the answer. Therefore keep traveling and pay close attention to whatever happens, even if the teacher is nowhere to be seen. The teacher knows when the drumming will end, so just keep journeying until you hear the call-back drumming signal. When you are thus called back, thank the teacher, even if you cannot see him or her, and return down to the Middle World and your body, retracing your route very quickly. After you have returned to the ordinary reality of our world, sit up and review your experience carefully. Note where you met your teacher, because you want to know how to find him or her again. Especially review everything that happened after you asked your question, remembering the first thing that the teacher said or did, and how that might be the core answer. Then review all that happened afterward. In this review, note and think about the details you were shown or experienced. Attempt to understand how they are supplementary answers to the initial core answer. You should have a notebook in which to record all this information afterward. Siberian and other tribal shamans considered it disrespectful of the spirits they visited in the other worlds not to honor all the information they received. Since the shamans did not have writing, and thus no notebooks, they made great efforts to remember everything they could, including later painting the surfaces of their drums as mnemonic devices to remind themselves of their discoveries. By paying attention and remembering what we are told or given, we show our respect for helping spirits and thereby invite even greater success in our future ascensions. Second Exercise: Requesting Health Advice or a Healing When you ascend to the Upper World for health advice, you are only asking for information. The teachers there are so powerful, however, that they may choose to help through direct action. They may decide not only to provide you with health advice, but also to heal your condition. These spirits can heal without bothering to show you anything. But by revealing to you particular treatments, they teach you how to continue the healing work later. These direct demonstrations by the teachers are a major way that shamans acquire healing methods that they later use on their patients and themselves. These techniques vary according to the immediate case at hand. This is why shamans, through many visits to the teachers, can gradually ascertain the appropriate treatment for each condition, though details vary with each patient. Healing techniques demonstrated by a teacher may include showing you methods of treatment for you to continue back in ordinary reality. For example, a teacher may give you a potion, identify the plant(s) from which it is made, and tell you how to prepare it. A teacher may also refer you to specific physicians you have not yet heard of. Now prepare to make another ascent to a level in the Upper World where you previously found a teacher. This time, ask a health-related question. You can also journey to a teacher to ask directly for a healing —and not just for yourself, but also for others, if they have requested it. You should start practicing on your own health first, however, to prepare for the day you may be ready to help others. Do not feel selfish, for this is an opportunity to gain experience. Also, you should become as healthy as possible in order to be able to benefit others. Continue such practice so that you will be better prepared to serve others spiritually if they should ask. Decide what specific healing you desire. Consider your personal health: is there any condition that you would like alleviated or cured that has been bothering you? Most of us, particularly as we get older, have no trouble targeting some pain, discomfort, or health problem we would like to have cured. The pain or illness can be either physical or mental/emotional. Pick one such problem and make a clear sentence of the request: for example, “Please cure my backache.” When you seek a healing, do not ask a question of your teacher; just request the specific healing desired. Sometimes the teacher may not demonstrate the healing and may even disappear, but normally, during the rest of your journey, the teacher will be working to alleviate your illness or pain.Remember, as I noted, that when you seek health advice from a teacher, you may also be given a healing. Conversely, when you journey for healing, you may also be given advice or information instead or together with the healing. So remember and learn everything you can. If you receive a healing or advice, thank the teacher or the helping spirit before you leave. If you receive a healing, go back for repeated treatments until you are completely well. For this I recommend ascending no less than once a week. A last note: out of respect for the sanctity of your teacher or helping spirits, unless it is for a high purpose (such as the way some have shared their experiences in this book, or in a training workshop), I recommend keeping their exact identities to yourself.Keep in mind that shamanism is part of a holistic approach to health. In doing this work, do not give up regular medical or other ordinary.reality treatments, but add a missing spiritual dimension to such treatments by visiting your teacher to ask that he or she heal the troubling condition. APPENDIX B Descending to the Lower World to Compare Experiences My previous book on shamanic methods, The Way of the Shaman, described common locations used by tribal shamans to depart for the Lower World. The types of departure places that I now mention are well known to indigenous shamans. Contemporary Westerners also typically have success using them. These departure points include a hole in a specific location, a cave, a spring or well, a lake, a bay of an ocean, a tree with a hole in it (for entering the tree and going down), a whirlpool, and a waterfall’s pool (or an entrance behind the waterfall). Whatever the entrance you choose, it should be firmly located in the Middle World and known to you firsthand in OR. It is important that you do not simply close your eyes and visualize any cave or other type of departure place. For accurate shamanic journeying, you should know that it is in the Middle World and where. I advise using the same departure place in all your Lower World journeys in order to keep track of levels and places where you have been in NOR, and to know how to return rapidly and accurately to the Middle World. The following are a few examples of openings, with others described in Chapter 6. AN OPENING IN A SPECIFIC LOCATION An opening into the earth was a common departure place for going to the Lower World. For example, the shamanistic societies of the Puebloan peoples of the American Southwest used the sipapu (se pa po or sepapu) as their entrance place. For the Hopi, the sepapu was a specific hole in the Grand Canyon, the hole being identified also as the Center of the World.1 For many of the Puebloans, it was a hole in the floor in their sacred semisubterranean kiva chambers. On a shamanic level, these too were the Center of the World. Incidentally, one of the objections raised by Puebloan Taos elders against installing plumbing in their villages was that it would possibly obstruct the sacred passageways from the kivas’ sipapus to the Lower World.2 Another kind of entrance is found among some tribal peoples of the Northwest Coast of North America. Here the shaman sometimes descended through a hole dug in the earth floor of the plank house.3 For the Polar Eskimo (Inuit) shaman, the hole was typically excavated in the ice floor of the winter dwelling, the igloo, and the shaman went through it down into the sea.4 One can also use the hole made by a burrowing animal, such as a fox, woodchuck, or gopher. The rabbit hole made famous by Lewis Carroll’s Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland is an obvious example of how classic children’s literature abounds in unconscious shamanic perspectives. I advise Westerners not to use the openings of drains into sewage systems as a way to start for the Lower World. Not only are they inappropriate for such sacred work, but they lead only to elsewhere in the Middle World. New Yorkers who try using them usually end up in the Hudson or East River! A CAVE The ideal cave or cavern for leaving to go to the Lower World should have some depth or mystery connected to it, such as a passageway that you have not thoroughly penetrated in ordinary reality. It is not essential to have previously entered the cave, but only to have seen its mouth in ordinary reality. This can be an advantage, for it means that what lies beyond the mouth of the cave is totally unknown to you and thus may provide an excellent transition into nonordinary reality. Although a simple rock shelter with no deep corridors is usually a far less satisfactory departure place than a dark cave, a journeyer can sometimes use one by entering a crack in its rock face. Since these are journeys of the spirit, even a crack an inch wide can permit access for the experienced person.Later, in an exercise to practice journeying to the Lower World with the help of drumming, you will have the opportunity to pass into the cave opening and beyond, looking for a tunnel or tube leading downward. One last thing about selecting a cave or cavern: try not to pick one located high on a mountain. If you do, and go downward from it, you may still be in the Middle World when you emerge. It is better to pick a cave or cavern that is only slightly, or not at all, higher than the surrounding landscape. SELECTING YOUR DEPARTURE PLACE FOR GOING TO THE LOWER WORLD Sit or lie down in a quiet, semidarkened room, close your eyes, and relax. Select a departure site for the Lower World and try to remember how it looked to you in ordinary reality. After the drumming begins, seeing even a brief glimpse of your departure place when you close your eyes is adequate. Consider it a success even if it is faint and lacking color. If you cannot see the departure place even briefly, then try another site you remember, but do not get involved in extensive “shopping” for the “perfect” departure site. And it does not matter whether an opening into the earth is small or large, for these are journeys of spirit. If you are having difficulty glimpsing the place, simply wait until doing the exercises below. Having a specific mission usually makes visualization easier. Changing consciousness from the OSC to the SSC with the aid of the drumming is the start of passing the first barrier or transition zone, the one between ordinary and nonordinary reality. One has successfully passed that barrier when one begins to descend through a tunnel to the Lower World. First Exercise: Journeying to the Lower World to Meet an Animal In this first journey, your mission will be to go to the Lower World, asking that an animal be waiting for you there. You are not “getting” an animal, just visiting one that is willing to present itself, normally an animal that is already connected to you whether you know it or not. First, lie or sit down with your eyes covered with a kerchief or other material. When you are ready to journey, repeat silently to yourself three times your mission, to fix it clearly in your mind. In this case, your mission is to go to the Lower World, asking that some unknown animal be waiting for you there. Do not have preconceptions about what kind of animal this will be. The animal knows who it is, and that is all that is necessary.To the sound of the recorded drumming, or live drum (beaten by another person), go down through the entrance you have chosen, look for a downward-slanting tunnel, and traverse it until you are outdoors in the Lower World, which may appear in black-and-white or in color. Also, in your first journey, the images may seem faint. (There is more information on this transition in The Way of the Shaman, 1980 edition, pages 30–32.) If you use a recording, set it so that you will have a short journey for this exercise, about fifteen minutes. As you travel downward, mentally or telepathically ask that an unknown animal be waiting for you just outside the other end of the tunnel in the Lower World. When you meet the animal, simply get acquainted with it. For now, try to avoid conversing with it, and simply enjoy its company silently. If you see the animal, which is true for most people, then see if you can also feel it. If you do not see it but sense its presence, try to see it. You may choose either to stay with it in one place or to explore a bit of the Lower World in its company. If an animal is not waiting for you outside the end of the tunnel, journey farther out into the Lower World, still sending the mental message that you want to meet an animal. When the call-back signal is made by the more rapid drumming, take leave of the animal, thank it for being with you, retrace your route rapidly back up the tunnel, and return to the room or place from which you departed.When you have returned, remove your eye covering and quietly review your journey. If possible, record the details in your notebook. If someone was beating a drum for you, you may wish to share your experience. Afterward, of course, you can reciprocate by letting your friend journey while you beat the drum. If you were journeying alone and using recorded drumming and the simultaneous-narration technique described in Appendix A, play back your recorded narration of what happened and make notes about anything you would like to remember. Do not be discouraged if you do not succeed in journeying this time, or have a faint journey, or do not meet an animal. Simply keep practicing this exercise until you meet an animal in the Lower World. Shamanism, like any other discipline, requires commitment and practice to achieve success. One of my students worked eight months unsuccessfully and then “broke through,” thereafter often having vivid journey experiences, even in color. Second Exercise: Divination Journeying to the Animal Divination is often surprisingly easy if one uses the ancient methods of the shaman. As with other things in shamanism, the quality of the results depends primarily on the spirits and whether you approach them in the right ways. To prepare for this work, you will take another journey to the Lower World. This time, however, it will not be a journey simply to meet an unknown animal. Instead, you will have a very specific, limited mission using the knowledge you have already acquired on how to get to the Lower World and about the animal you have already met. This will be the start of your use of the classic shamanic journey method for getting answers to questions by entering realms of hidden knowledge. To begin, please take a few minutes to think about the most important personal questions in your life. These should be questions with which you have struggled without obtaining a clear answer or solution. Pick the most important of these questions. You should phrase it in a simple, clear sentence, preferably starting with one of the following words: “who,” “what,” “where,” “how,” or “why.” I do not recommend the word “when.” This is for reasons that need to be learned in more advanced training than what can be provided in this book. For more on framing questions, see this page and this page. Be sure your question is not long, complicated, or ambiguous. To remove ambiguity, eliminate the words “and” or “or” from the question. This is to prevent the sentence from having two or more questions built into it. If the sentence contains more than a single question, then the journeyer may not be able to tell which question is being answered if the animal replies symbolically.Before journeying, write the question down in your notebook, and repeat it three times to yourself so that you will not forget it. If you are journeying with a drumming recording and headphones, and also using the simultaneous-narration method (see Appendix A, this page), it is useful to repeat the question three times into your lapel microphone at the start of the recording. You should use the same entrance as before, into the earth or water, and follow the same tunnel route down from there to arrive in the Lower World. The only thing that will be new is your objective or mission. Your mission must always be clear in your mind both before and during a journey.Remember your mission: to visit the animal you met in your last journey and to ask it your question. When the drumming begins, visualize your opening into the earth or water, and journey down it through the tunnel, sending down a telepathic or mental message asking the animal to be waiting for you just outside the tunnel in the Lower World. When you meet the animal, immediately ask it your question telepathically. It may answer in the same way, or it may even speak the answer aloud in words. More often, the animal may answer by shaking or nodding its head, or by moving its body to provide the answer. In the latter case, it may not be clear what the animal is communicating until you come to understand its body language. Be patient; additional journeys to the animal will lead to much greater understanding. If the animal provides you immediately with an answer, then simply spend the rest of the drumming time visiting with the animal. Do not try to ask a new question, but use the opportunity to get acquainted. The animal might even take you on a brief tour of the Lower World. Just let happen whatever may occur until the drumming call-back signal sounds. Then honor the animal by telling it good-bye, and return back up to the Middle World, rapidly retracing the route you used to descend. Although the animal commonly provides the answer immediately upon being questioned, there is one important exception. That is when the animal turns and runs away. If that happens, then run after it. The animal will lead you on a journey—showing you the answer. That is, the sights you see on the journey constitute the answer to the question. Much of the journey work of the evolving shaman consists of learning how to “read” such journeys; in other words, of learning how to read the signs or symbols one is shown. When the journey is over and you are back in your room or other departure space, summarize in your own mind what the answer was. Then review the details of what happened, taking notes. If you have a recorder, you can also now dictate the details, unless you already did so using simultaneous narration. Even when you make a recording of a journey, try to take notes afterward because they are much easier to consult in the future than having to play back entire recordings. If you recorded your accounts, the notes can refer to the specific recordings for later playbacks. The notes can be underlined to call attention to important communications and experiences and, if kept together in a single notebook, provide an easy way of tracking your progress. From time to time, you should review your notes, for earlier journeys that seemed unimportant or difficult to understand may gradually to reveal their significance to you. Nothing you are shown in your journeys is really insignificant. In nonliterate cultures, where note-taking was not possible, shamans had to discipline their memory to recall as many details of their journey as possible. To forget what the spirits told or showed them was disrespectful, and the shaman could eventually lose their continued help. If you work a reasonable period of time in shamanism, you will discover that the advice of power animals is not only compassionate, but also often humorous. They are like good friends. At the same time, journeys are awesome, sacred experiences of immense value. Shamanic journeying, like shamanism as a whole, is a discipline. You plan your journey mission, make the journey with a mission, and if necessary make another journey or two to clarify any remaining uncertainties. You can return at will, again and again, to obtain any information you still lack. APPENDIX C Resources for Training If you wish to compare your own experiences by using the information in Appendices A and B, I suggest you use the simultaneous-narration method, described on this page, and a high-quality shamanic journey drumming recording. They are available online in digitally remastered CD and MP3 download formats from the Foundation (see contact information below). To go farther, and if you are new to core shamanism, I highly recommend the Foundation’s two-day “Basic Workshop, The Way of the Shaman,” which will introduce you to experiencing both the Upper and Lower Worlds and to getting help and seeking healing. The workshop is required preparation for more advanced Foundation courses that deal with all three worlds, such as the “Two-Week Shamanic Healing Intensive,” the “Three-Year Program of Advanced Initiations in Shamanism and Shamanic Healing,” and many others. All the Foundation’s workshops and courses are taught by a carefully selected and trained faculty with years of experience in shamanic healing and other aspects of shamanism. “The Way of the Shaman” workshop is offered in English throughout the United States and in the following other countries: Canada (also in French in Quebec), the United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand. It has long been offered in other languages in other countries, starting with my 1978 teaching in Germany. You can find more information on the Foundation’s website: www.shamanism.org. The Foundation for Shamanic Studies can also be reached at: P.O. Box 1939 Mill Valley, California 94942 info@shamanism.org APPENDIX D Core Shamanism and Healing: Information for Physicians and Health Professionals WRITTEN WITH SANDRA HARNER, PHD The experiences in the preceding pages, no matter how personally extraordinary and life-changing, are especially important as sources of knowledge and spirit power to help us alleviate suffering and pain in others. This chapter, written in a format especially intended for health care professionals, also introduces the general reader to some important aspects of core shamanism in connection with healing work. Core shamanism, as said earlier, consists of the universal, near-universal, and common features of shamanism, together with journeys to other worlds, a distinctive feature of shamanism. These journeys are commonly made in order to secure spiritual help, such as in healing patients. The teaching and use of the basic principles and practices of core shamanism have encouraged the rapid revival of shamanic healing practices in the West and elsewhere. Today what has been called “core shamanism” in these pages is the dominant mode of practice of shamanism in most of the West, although various practitioners, both indigenous and Western, continue to work in the mode of one or another localized indigenous shamanic or quasi-shamanic tradition. Such culture.specific modes especially characterize indigenous practitioners serving their own native populations, as in the United States and Canada. In that connection, it is important to note that the information in this section is intended as a brief introduction to shamanic healing practice and by no means begins to exhaust the varieties of spiritual sources of illness, and the varieties of modes of shamanic diagnosis and treatment. By not imitating any specific cultural tradition, core shamanism is especially suited for utilization by Westerners who desire a relatively culture-free system that they can adopt and integrate into their lives. The following outline of shamanic practices focuses upon the underlying cross-cultural commonalities of shamanism known as core shamanism and does not attempt to introduce specific indigenous tribal or regional variations and elaborations. Introductions to some of the principles and practices of core shamanism may be found in: Michael Harner’s The Way of the Shaman1 and “A Core Shamanic Theory of Dreams,”2 and in publications by various of his students, such as Tom Cowan’s Shamanism as a Spiritual Practice for Daily Life.3 However, the most important practical teaching in both core and indigenous shamanism is not to be found in published literature, both because it has largely occurred in nonliterate cultures, and because it is done by person-to-person experientially based instruction, by example, by direct communication from the spirits, and through personal experimentation and practice. Furthermore, much of this experiential learning is ineffable or near ineffable and thus has not been easily communicated to Western anthropologists and observers. For these reasons, there will be very limited references to published literature in the following pages. Those seeking firsthand experiential training in shamanism and shamanic healing are referred to Appendix C. PRINCIPAL CONCEPTS OF CORE SHAMANISM This section offers a summary of the principal concepts of core shamanism and its general approach to illness and necessary interventions. The presentation is organized around how the basic concepts relate to these. I. Assumptions about nature and humankind II. Pathogenesis/etiology of health and illness III. Diagnosis IV. Therapy V. Training and practice in core shamanism I. ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT NATURE AND HUMANKIND Shamans have long assumed that humans are part of the totality of nature, related to all other biological forms, and not superior to them. This “pagan” assumption was one of the many reasons that European shamans were persecuted by the Inquisition and that indigenous shamans elsewhere were likewise ridiculed and condemned by Western missionaries who viewed such an assumption as contrary to the Biblical account of the origin of humans. Indeed, it was not really until Darwin’s On the Origin of Species4 and The Descent of Man5 that Westerners began, often reluctantly, to return to a general recognition of humankind’s kinship to all other life forms. Even today, of course, many adherents of the major Eastern and Western religions, as a matter of faith, still balk at such recognition.Another basic, usually implicit rather than explicit, assumption in shamanism is that there are two realities, and that the perception of each depends upon one’s state of consciousness. Therefore, those in the “ordinary state of consciousness” (OSC) perceive only “ordinary reality” (OR). Those in the “shamanic state of consciousness” (SSC) are able to enter into and perceive “nonordinary reality” (NOR). These are both called realities because each is empirically encountered. Each is recognized to have its own forms of knowledge and relevance to human existence.6 NOR is not a consensual reality, and indeed if it were, shamanic practitioners would have no function, for it is their responsibility to perceive successfully what others do not. One of the distinguishing characteristics of the shamanic practitioner is the ability to move back and forth at will between these realities with discipline and purpose in order to heal and help others. A corollary assumption is that the individual beings encountered in nonordinary reality are themselves real. These are called “spirits,” and are considered real by shamanic practitioners because they interact with them firsthand. This interaction involves direct perception with all the senses. In other words, for the shamanic practitioner, the existence of spirits is not a belief but an empirical fact.7 In NOR, shamanic practitioners routinely see, touch, smell, and hear spirits; they find them as real as the fellow humans they interact with in OR. As they work, individual practitioners discover which of the encountered beings are personal helping, or tutelary, spirits; i.e., those who provide reliable information and miraculous help in healing. Another core assumption is that living members of all species, including humans, have souls, or lifelong personal spirits. The soul is defined as the spiritual essence of the individual required for that individual to be alive. Thus it is present from conception or birth until death, although the degree to which it is present may vary. Upon death, the soul continues to exist, as it did before birth, but the length of time it does so as an identifiable entity varies. For shamanic practitioners, souls are identifiable entities because they encounter them directly in nonordinary reality, as they do other spirits. Research on the existence of spirits has been largely been up to shamans. Over many millennia in thousands of different cultures, independently on five different continents, they conducted countless healing experiments with their patients, often in life-and-death situations, with results that have consistently supported the theory of the reality of spirits. For this reason, the fundamentals of indigenous shamanic practice are remarkably consistent throughout the world, although due to local historical factors, portions of indigenous shamanic traditions have sometimes been modified or destroyed. A core feature of shamanism is that the Universe is divisible into three worlds: the Upper, Middle, and Lower. The Middle World, in which we live, has both its OR and NOR (or nonspiritual and spiritual) aspects. The Upper and Lower Worlds, in contrast, are purely spiritual and are found only in nonordinary reality, where they exist “outside of time.” The shaman often makes “out-of-body” journeys to the Upper and Lower Worlds to seek assistance for healing and divination from compassionate beings there. The core shaman’s helping spirits are typically those of beings, human and nonhuman, who once lived in ordinary reality and, following death, left this Middle World and entered the NOR of the Upper and Lower Worlds. This is the same realm of divine union and love described by near-death survivors, mystical explorers in virtually all spiritual traditions, and, of course, by shamanic journeyers. These departed spirits, as they progress farther up and down from the Middle World, merge by degrees with that loving hidden universe to become beings of compassion and power. CORE SHAMANIC ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT NATURE AND HUMANKIND Unity Humans are part of the totality of nature, are related to all other biological forms, and are not superior to them. Two Realities Ordinary state of consciousness (OSC) accesses ordinary reality (OR), and shamanic state of consciousness (SSC) accesses nonordinary reality (NOR). Universe Three worlds: Upper World, Middle World, Lower World. Souls Members of all species, including humans, have souls (their personal enduring spirits). Helping Spirits Their existence is a real, empirical fact; a large variety of types; not all-powerful outside of NOR, but with shamanic assistance can have a significant impact in OR, as in healing matters. Journey A shamanic voyage into nonordinary reality, especially to the Upper and Lower Worlds, to seek assistance for healing and divination. Departed spirits who have not yet left this Middle World normally have not achieved this compassion and power. For this and other reasons, core shamanic practitioners commonly journey to the Upper and Lower Worlds to find their spirit helpers. As they make journeys and do work for their clients, they discover which of these spiritual beings are especially successful in effecting healings. Since shamanic practitioners empirically discover their helping spirits through direct personal observation, interaction, and the testing of their powers, their helping spirits may be, or may not be, spirits who are generally worshiped by, or known to, people in the culture at large. These compassionate helping spirits beyond this Middle World desire to alleviate suffering and pain in our world of ordinary reality (OR) for reasons that include the following: (1) they now exist merged within realms of divine love without pain; (2) having formerly lived in ordinary reality, they understand and empathize with our pain and suffering; (3) they seem to understand the extent of pain and suffering even more than we do, for they have transcended our reality and therefore can compare both; (4) they look back upon our situation and take pity on us; (5) consequently, they wish to help relieve our suffering and pain. The compassionate spirits are known, in various forms, in virtually all human cultures. In many tribal societies, they include ancestral spirits as well as spirits of animals and plants. In Hinduism and Christianity, for example, they may be known as saints; i.e., the spirits of saints. Ordinary people and priests in a great range of cultures commonly appeal to these spirits by means of prayer. Although supplication through prayer can often facilitate spiritual help from the other reality and is part of shamanic practice, prayer is not usually recognized in shamanism as being as effective as shamanic two-way interaction with one or more helping spirits and bringing that help to a patient here. For the shaman, one of the significant reasons that prayer is often of limited success is that the compassionate spirits of the Upper and Lower Worlds are not all-powerful outside the realms in which they dwell. Since their power to affect circumstances in the Middle World is limited, they characteristically need ordinary-reality allies to help create openings and passageways in order to alleviate pain and suffering. Shamans are such allies, providing through their journeys strong healing connections to the Middle World. Consequently, the shamanic journey is a centerpiece of core shamanism, bringing both realities together to effect “impossible” (i.e., miraculous) results in alleviating suffering. The shamanic journeyer, by crossing into the other reality, contacts and often returns as an embodiment of the compassionate healing spirits. This period of interaction and unity is typically of limited duration, for great concentration in the shamanic state of consciousness is necessary to sustain it. In this state, the shamanic practitioner is not a supplicant as much as someone actively engaged with a helping spirit to alleviate the suffering and illness of a client. Through this intimate alliance, shamanic practitioners in indigenous cultures are typically expected by their peoples to produce healing results beyond those considered possible by prayer alone. Besides the compassionate spirits of the Upper and Lower Worlds, which normally are the healing helpers of the shamanic practitioners, there are the spirits of deceased beings still dwelling in the Middle World and its interfaces with the Upper and Lower Worlds. These disembodied Middle World spirits, which are of all species, are not only an unreliable source of compassionate help, but also are rather commonly a source of illness for those still living. Many of these spirits are confused, often unaware that they are dead, and maintaining the behaviors they had while alive. Suffering and wandering aimlessly in the Middle World, they are frequently sources of illness for the living, such as in cases of spirit intrusion and involuntary possession. II. PATHOGENESIS/ETIOLOGY OF HEALTH AND ILLNESS Good health and the absence of serious injury are considered characteristic of the normal human condition, except in the case of the very elderly. Poor health, illness, and serious injury are usually due to specific spiritual and nonspiritual factors, and the task of the shamanic practitioner is to deal with the spiritual factors involved in an illness or injury.Spiritual factors that can contribute to, or bring about, illness are of two main types: (1) those that involve a loss by the patient of a spirit important to the patient’s well-being; (2) the acquisition by the patient of a spirit detrimental to the patient’s well-being. A. LOSS OF A SPIRIT IMPORTANT TO THE PATIENT’S HEALTH AND WELL-BEING 1. Soul loss Also, a minor physical trauma, such as hitting one’s finger with a hammer, typically effects a small amount of soul loss in the affected area (in this example, the finger). A major trauma, such as severe emotional shock or physical injury, typically results in significant soul loss. A comatose condition correlates with almost complete loss of soul, and death with a complete loss. Soul loss commonly manifests as a “dispirited” condition, the degree of which depends upon the severity of the loss as well as the history of previous soul loss. A person who with a history of significant soul loss frequently can be characterized as “not being all there,” an apt phrase that may represent an unconscious awareness in our culture of the condition. Latin Americans consciously have the concept of soul loss in their culture, and they identify the illness by a term representing the trauma leading to soul loss: in Spanish, susto, or “fright.” Informal unpublished surveys indicate that even non-Latino middle-class Americans, when asked, state that they believe themselves to have experienced some soul loss during their lives, even when they have never heard of the concept before. 2. Guardian spirit loss Separate from soul loss, and very important as a factor leading to illness, is the loss of personal spiritual power—a consequence of the individual having lost the protection of a personal guardian spirit to help ward off illnesses, injuries, and adversity in general. However, even the retention of such spiritual power and protection is usually not adequate to prevent the person from becoming ill from epidemic disease. Unlike soul loss, the loss of protective spiritual power is not usually the consequence of trauma, but rather a precondition for being vulnerable to trauma and to most serious illness, whether acute or chronic. Since the loss of this spiritual power opens the door to significant trauma, an individual who has undergone spiritual power loss becomes consequently more susceptible to soul loss. B. ACQUISITION OF A SPIRIT DETRIMENTAL TO THE PATIENT’S WELL-BEING A person who has significantly lost his/her personal spiritual power is especially prone to illnesses in the form of spirit intrusion. A person who, in addition, has had serious soul loss is vulnerable to involuntary spirit possession. Both conditions typically involve the acquisition of disembodied Middle World spirits detrimental to the individual’s mental/emotional or physical health. 1. Spirit intrusionsWhen a person has lost his/her personal guardian spirit, the protective power provided by that spirit gradually ebbs away, with the result being that the individual becomes susceptible to nonordinary, or spirit, intrusions. These intrusions produce localized illness or pain. In order for these intrusive spirits to have enough power to penetrate the body of a person, they generally must be sent by another person or persons. This can be done either consciously or unconsciously. In indigenous societies, such intrusions are commonly the result of conscious hostile spiritual acts by sorcerers. Curses or hostile spells constitute a related, but somewhat different, conscious phenomenon. In contemporary Western society, generally the spirit intrusions are sent unknowingly, for most educated Westerners are ignorant of such a possibility. While they may recognize the possibility of prayer to heal and help others, they generally have been unaware of the potentiality of negative wishes, or harmful analogues of prayer, to spiritually precipitate or worsen illness in others.8 In other words, they are uneducated about how to prevent their own emotional states from actualizing hostile manifestations on a spiritual level. Such manifestations can be harmful not only to the person who is the object of the hostility, but also to the knowing or unknowing sender of the injurious spiritual energies. In shamanism a kind of karmic reciprocity is recognized. More specifically, what a person sends out spiritually to others, whether with hate or compassion, will return in a like manner, but multiplied in its effects. Thus a sensible person who is shamanically trained scrupulously avoids hostile spiritual activities. To do otherwise is not only unethical, but also potentially leads to life.threatening consequences.Intrusions, because of their localized nature in the body, tend to produce symptoms of pain, discomfort, and illness at specific loci. They may do this in concert with OR infections and injuries or independently. 2. Involuntary possessions engendering illness When a person has not only lost his/her personal guardian spirit but also has suffered significant soul loss, then that individual becomes especially vulnerable to illness in the form of involuntary possession by a spirit. Without the protective power provided by the guardian spirit, the person becomes a somewhat unoccupied spiritual vessel due to the serious soul loss. This presents an opportunity for the soul of another person to enter and occupy the body (including the mind). When this occurs, it may properly be termed an illness engendered by involuntary spirit possession.This condition must be distinguished from voluntary spirit possession, or spirit embodiment, which is commonly practiced by shamans and mediums (including “channelers”), and which is not an illness but a disciplined professional practice. In such voluntary spiritual possession, the practitioner has specific helping and teaching spirits (often called “guides” in mediumship or channeling) whom he or she deliberately invites to come, usually from the Upper World, to occupy his/her consciousness for a short period of time, such as in a séance. Involuntary spirit possession connected to illness is characteristically the occupation of an individual’s mind/body by spirits (souls) of deceased humans who have remained in the Middle World. Usually such spirits are those of persons who had sudden, traumatic deaths, with the result that their souls abruptly fled their bodies in a disoriented state. While these spirits retain some memory, they are most commonly confused and suffering wanderers who sometimes do not even realize that they are dead. Indeed, their attachment to living humans reinforces their personal illusion that they are still alive. For the living person who is thus possessed, the consequences include dual identities (and if possessed by more than a single spirit, multiple identities), leading commonly to considerable confusion, the acquisition of new phobias, inappropriate social and other behavior, and general demoralization. In other words, the mental and emotional problems of the deceased can have significant deleterious effects on the host person. For example, if the deceased was addicted to alcohol or drugs, the possessed person will tend to exhibit these same tendencies. If the possessing being is that of a sociopath, extreme antisocial behaviors may thus become manifest in the host person. It is this last type of case that has probably led to the widespread folk belief that possession is the work of an evil spirit. III. DIAGNOSIS Shamanic practitioners primarily rely on divination to obtain significant information about their patients’ health problem. Entering the shamanic state of consciousness (SSC), they engage in diagnostic divination in two main ways, which may be employed singly or in combination to make a single diagnosis: (1) by consulting their helping spirits; (2) by shamanically “seeing” the spiritual causation of an illness. A. CONSULTING THE HELPING SPIRITS Through experience, shamanic practitioners learn which of their helping spirits are most successful in diagnosis and under what circumstances. These helpers are generally all-knowing observers of the Middle World, even when not resident here, and thus can provide information about each individual patient. Practitioners themselves do not need to use OR techniques such as patient history collection or laboratory analyses, although obviously the patients communicate their health problems to the practitioners at the time of their visits. Divinatory consultations with the helping spirits occur in various ways, including these two: (1) by journeying to them; and (2) by doing object divination. 1. Consulting by means of the shamanic journey A commonly used method for diagnosis is the divinatory shamanic journey to the Upper or Lower Worlds. This is done by practitioners asking one of their compassionate helping spirits for information about the origin and nature of the patient’s health problems. In this way, the practitioners can learn if the patient’s problems involve such factors as soul loss, guardian spirit loss, spirit intrusions, and involuntary possession. First the practitioners call for spiritual help and then enter nonordinary reality. This is done by going into the SSC, most typically with the aid of auditory driving in a range of about 3.5 to 4 Hertz, corresponding approximately to the lower range of theta EEG waves.9 The auditory driving can be supplied by a live drum beaten by an assistant, by a rattle, or can be supplied in recorded form through headphones worn by the practitioners (such as CDs and MP3s of shamanic journey drumming available through the Foundation for Shamanic Studies). This diagnostic method is usually most effective if the patient is in the same room, but it can be done at a distance as well. Core practitioners usually do not use consciousness-changing substances to achieve the SSC, although they are well aware of their shamanic use in some indigenous societies. While listening and journeying, the practitioners typically are in a relaxed position, lying down or sitting, in order to be able to leave an awareness of their body behind as they spiritually travel in NOR,10 although they can also move (“dance”) in both realities as they journey to the sound of the drum. 2. Consulting by means of object divination A less frequently used method for diagnosis is object divination. In this technique, shamanic practitioners pray for assistance from their compassionate helping spirits. Then, using means such as examining a randomly selected stone, partially burning a carapace or scapula, or casting an object or objects, they visually analyze the subsequent results in the OSC according to a definite personal discipline. This personal discipline has been previously learned and developed through such means as shamanic journeying and experimentation through practice. B. SHAMANICALLY “SEEING” THE SPIRITUAL CAUSATION OF AN ILLNESS Another method of shamanic diagnosis is so-called “X-ray vision,” especially done with the “strong” or “third” eye, to discover if any spirit intrusions are present. In this technique, practitioners enter the SSC and call their helping spirits to merge with them (“voluntary possession”). With their help, the practitioners perceive a harmful intrusion, the spiritual aspect of a localized illness or pain causing, or contributing to, harm in a patient’s body. The intrusion typically presents itself to practitioners in the form of a small entity that the practitioners, through training and experience, know is harmful to the patient.11 If the practitioners do not perceive such an intrusion, then the problem is not considered to have a localized spiritual cause. Such a diagnostic inspection, to be complete, may have to be done on several consecutive days or nights. IV. THERAPY Shamanic practitioners operate conceptually within a nonexclusivistic healing paradigm, seeing practice as complementary to other modalities of therapy. This holistic approach is nothing new, being also characteristic of indigenous societies, where shamans are responsible for providing the spiritual side of treatment for the community. Thus indigenous shamans may sometimes refer their patients to nonshamans in their societies who are skilled in bone setting or massage, or even to missionary doctors to provide aspirin, antibiotics, or other Western medical treatment. Such Western medical treatments are seen by both core shamanic practitioners and by indigenous shamans as nonspiritual and, therefore, noncompetitive with, shamanic therapies. Further, indigenous shamans often view Western medical treatments as proffering symptomatic relief that does not address underlying spiritual problems of the patients. Thus, among the Salish peoples of Washington State and British Columbia, who have access to both types of treatments, the tendency often is to consider Western medical treatment as the “alternative” or “complementary” mode of healing.12 While it is true that shamans often supplement their spiritual treatments with botanical remedies, such plant remedies are typically known to the community at large, and their application is normally not a distinctive aspect of shamanic practice. Contrary to the impression given in the popular Western media, many indigenous shamans, such as those of the Untsuri Shuar (Jívaro) people of the Upper Amazon, traditionally never gave plant remedies as part of their practice, leaving such treatments to nonshamans.13 A cornerstone ethic of the use of shamanic healing practices is to engage in treatment only at the request of the patient (in the case of minor children, at the request of a parent), for practitioners should not try to presume what is ultimately good for someone else. An underlying philosophical factor, particularly in life-threatening situations, is that the shamanic practitioners’ purpose is to alleviate suffering and pain, not to keep patients alive in ordinary reality at all costs. Shamans have long since discovered through their journeys that the Middle World is the pain reality, and like many near-death survivors (among whom they often are numbered), they have discovered the love, beauty, and ecstasy awaiting one who goes beyond this Middle World. Even when a patient is unable to communicate an OR request for treatment, such as in cases of coma or stroke, the shamanic practitioner has means of establishing communication with the patient in NOR in order to discover his/her wishes. Another cornerstone of treatment is that all successful healing systems are considered part of a holistic approach, and therefore, all productive treatment modes are seen as complementary unless they are contraindicated in specific cases. Accordingly, a dichotomy opposing “primary” and “complementary” is not employed here. The following use of the terms “primary” and “secondary” refers only to the usual optimal sequential application of treatment, since both spiritual and nonspiritual treatment should be given whenever appropriate. 1. Core Soul retrieval A. Soul retrieval is generally most useful as a primary approach in cases of mental and emotional trauma. Soul retrieval has the effect of restoring the portion or portions of the patient’s soul that had left the patient at the time of an emotional and/or physical trauma. B. Soul retrieval is generally most useful as a secondary approach in cases of physical trauma. Emergency nonspiritual treatment usually has priority, with soul retrieval work soon taking place as a subsequent treatment of the problem. It is also useful in cases of dependency on alcohol and other drugs. After depossession treatment (see below), soul retrieval and guardian spirit retrieval work should be done as soon as possible to reduce the possibility of spirit repossession. C. These treatments are recommended only when done by a qualified shamanic practitioner trained in core soul retrieval. D. The shamanic practitioner should be careful not to share with the patient what the practitioner saw or experienced in an altered state while doing soul retrieval. This is one of the distinctive features of the core methodology of soul retrieval.14 Disclosures to the patient of the practitioner’s personal visionary experiences in the shamanic state of consciousness are contraindicated, just as they are with regard to the practitioner’s visionary experiences in encountering spirit intrusions in a patient. 2. Spirit depossession A. Spirit depossession, as a primary approach, is generally most useful in the following situations: Cases of dependency on alcohol and other drugs Spirit depossession work is very useful as a primary approach in treating alcohol and drug addiction problems. For such treatment to be successful, the patient (1) must be committed to giving up the dependency; and (2) must have abstained from the abused substance for an adequate period of time (ideally at least 72 hours) before undergoing the shamanic treatment. Repeated treatments may be necessary over a period of weeks. Cases of mental and emotional illness Mental and emotional illnesses, ranging from neurotic to psychotic, usually have a significant spiritual component. Most commonly, this involves varying degrees of possession by one or more deceased humans whose consciousness has intruded into that of the patient and altered the patient’s behavior. Often these spirits are under the delusion that they are still alive and therefore confuse their identities with those of the patient. In other cases, they are aware that they are deceased and are consciously choosing to continue to act out their usual behavior through the person into whom they have intruded. For depossession treatment to be successful, the patient (1) must be seriously committed to the treatment, and (2) must not be under the influence of sedating or other mood-changing medication. Repeated treatments may be necessary over a period of months.15 B. Spirit depossession is usually most useful as a secondary approach in the following situations: Cases of dependency on alcohol and other drugs In situations where emergency and supportive medical procedures are necessary to help the patient arrive at a drug-free condition for at least 72 hours, then the shamanic treatment must be considered secondary in sequence, since depossession work cannot normally be successful without that precondition being met. Cases of mental and emotional illness When the patient is hysterical or having a psychotic episode, normal emergency psychotherapeutic procedures may have to take priority, with the depossession work secondary in sequence, and after the conditions outlined in section A have been met. C. These treatments are recommended only when done by a qualified shamanic practitioner. D. There are no contraindications except for the qualifiers indicated above. 3. Guardian spirit retrieval A. Guardian spirit retrieval is generally most useful as a primary approach in cases of chronic “dispiritedness” and depression, and in cases of chronic illness unresponsive to nonspiritual treatment. It is also useful as a primary approach in helping patients to cope with chronic adversity in their lives. Maximum effectiveness in guardian spirit retrieval is usually achieved by employing it in conjunction with soul retrieval. The purpose of guardian spirit retrieval is to restore spiritual power to patients to assist them in resisting current mental and physical illness, to help them heal injuries, and to reduce the probability of future illness and trauma. The common secondary effects of the resultant spiritual empowerments include a greater sense of well-being (also true of soul retrieval), increased self.confidence and success in achieving personal goals, and a more ethical approach to life. Some of the basics of guardian spirit retrieval are outlined in The Way of the Shaman as “power animal” retrieval.16 Although the retrieval of an animal guardian spirit is the most common form, anthropomorphic and other guardian spirits may be retrieved as well, using the same basic methods. B. Guardian spirit retrieval is generally most useful as a secondary approach after one or more of the these types of treatments: (1) soul retrieval; (2) spirit-intrusion extraction (to be discussed); (3) depossession. Guardian spirit retrieval is especially indicated immediately after depossession and spirit-intrusion extraction treatments to help fill the void left by the removal of the unwanted entities and thereby reduce the probability of a reentry by a possessing spirit or spirit intrusion. It should also be done after soul retrievals to help empower the patients to keep the retrieved soul parts and, in their recuperative situation, to protect them from recurring spirit possessions as well as intrusions. C. These treatments are recommended only when done by a qualified shamanic practitioner. D. There are no contraindications for guardian spirit retrieval. 4. Spirit-intrusion extraction A. Spirit-intrusion extraction is generally most useful as a primary approach in cases of chronic localized pain or illness which have not responded adequately to ordinary-reality medical treatment and which have been shamanically diagnosed as having the involvement of a spirit intrusion. The localized nature of intrusions usually distinguishes them from possession illness. The shamanic extraction of harmful spirit intrusions is a noninvasive method of removing the spiritual aspect of pain and/or illness from specific locations in the patient’s body. At no time in this treatment is the skin penetrated in OR terms, nor does the practitioner describe to the patient the NOR appearance of the intrusions. In extraction work, shamanic practitioners merge with their helping spirits to facilitate healing in both nonordinary and ordinary reality simultaneously. Two main techniques exist: (1) using the hands to pull the intrusions out of the patients; and (2) sucking out the intrusions.17 Both techniques are widely used in indigenous shamanism, but the latter one, because of its exotic appearance, is usually not employed with Westerners. It is desirable to repeat extraction treatments several days in a row. Recommended immediate follow-up treatment includes core soul retrievals and guardian spirit retrievals. B. Spirit-intrusion extraction is generally most useful as a secondary approach in cases of acute localized pain or illness which, after nonspiritual medical treatment, continue to manifest significant symptomology. C. These treatments are recommended only when done by a qualified shamanic practitioner. D. There are no contraindications except for previously discussed general qualifiers to shamanic treatment. V. TRAINING AND PRACTICE IN CORE SHAMANISM I. TRAINING A. Prerequisites and requirements To become a shamanic practitioner, one should be a mature, emotionally stable adult of compassion and intelligence who wishes to alleviate suffering and pain. Beyond this, the person should be able to journey into NOR with discipline and to contact his/her spirit helpers without supervision. Formal training in Western medicine and psychotherapy is not necessary or particularly relevant. B. Curriculum components Once one has learned to journey in NOR beyond the Middle World, all the training can be obtained, usually through many years of work, from helping (tutelary) spirits. Remarkably, regardless of culture, the instruction by the healing spirits is basically the same; this is a major reason shamanism is recognizable as a worldwide system. In some indigenous cultures, the shamanic trainees learn experientially largely from the spirits; in others, they learn key healing methods from existing shamans and then add to this basic knowledge experientially through practice and studying with their helping spirits, as during journeys. It is this latter approach which characterizes training in core shamanism. Thorough training to become a core shamanic practitioner involves experiential study, both in OR and NOR, of such subjects as: 1. Entering and exiting the shamanic state of consciousness with discipline and purpose to journey into NOR outside the Middle World and also to perceive NOR in the Middle World as necessary. 2. Shamanic journeying to the Upper and Lower Worlds, including discovering and mapping the levels in each, as well as journeying in the Middle World, aided by auditory driving. Such journeying includes discovering and working with one’s own tutelary spirits. 3. Divination (including shamanic diagnosis). 4. Guardian spirit retrieval. 5. Shamanic-extraction healing. 6. Core soul retrieval. 7. Spiritual dismemberment and rememberment. 8. Voluntary spirit possession or embodiment for healing work. 9. Depossession healing work. 10. Psychopomp work (alleviating the suffering of the dying and the deceased; if skilled enough, “escorting” souls to the next world). 11. Any and all teachings obtained experientially from one’s tutelary spirits. C. Duration and training requirements It is inappropriate to imply that there is a specific duration for training because shamanic practitioner training depends on a variety of factors, not the least of which is the pace at which tutelary spirits feel it is appropriate to progressively teach the trainee ineffable aspects of shamanic education. Indeed, it may accurately be said that even the most advanced shaman or shamanic practitioner is perpetually in training. Nonetheless, it can be noted that some Westerners become effective shamanic healing practitioners within four to eight years. This involves not only the help of the tutelary spirits, but also specific and thorough experiential training and practice in the subjects listed above. At the present time, such extensive and reliable preparation is available through the educational programs of the Foundation for Shamanic Studies (a nonprofit charitable and educational institution headquartered in Northern California), which has pioneered this training both in North America and overseas. The courses of the Foundation last as long as three years, with prior training a prerequisite. Screening of applicants is conducted before admission to major advanced courses. No degrees are given.18 II. QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Licensure and certification As with shamans in indigenous societies, shamanic practitioners in the West are not, and cannot, be certified as healers for the simple reason that their helping spirits can abandon them at any time, and without their help, successful shamanic healing work is not possible. Accordingly, shamanic practitioners cannot be certified nor licensed. Recognition can be given for the amount of training they have received in OR—for example, from the Foundation for Shamanic Studies—but this should not be confused with their actual success record in shamanic healing work. In indigenous societies, the reputation of shamans as successful healers is passed by word of mouth and depends on their current reported success rates, for spiritual power can be lost by even the best of shamanic healers. The Foundation for Shamanic Studies (www.shamanism.org) annually publishes in its journal, Shamanism, an international telephone directory, by community, of those involved to varying degrees with its work. As in indigenous villages, one can thus canvass others locally and obtain recommendations. Although no longer doing so, the Foundation has in the past provided certification as Harner Shamanic Counselors. HSC is not healing work, and the certified shamanic counselors may or may not be maintaining healing practices in addition to their counseling work. At present, the Foundation provides evidence that a student has completed a training course in Harner Shamanic Counseling. Regarding healing work, the Foundation does refer inquiries to knowledgeable faculty members who, as individuals, may have personal recommendations regarding currently successful shamanic practitioners their localities.19 Unfortunately, in contemporary Western society there are many unqualified persons claiming to be shamans or proficient in shamanism and shamanic healing. This situation is not unknown in non-Western societies, but in those societies, community consensus and personal recommendations are the sources of information in finding shamanic practitioners with reputations for recent healing successes. However, even in those cases, shamanic practitioners can lose the support of their helping spirits at any time and therefore no longer be able to heal. B. Legal status and regulation In the United States, there are no laws, statutes, or governmental regulations pertaining explicitly to shamanic practice, as such, known to the authors as of this writing. However, there often are local ordinances that broadly outlaw spiritual healing and divination as well as similar rules and regulations of professional medical, psychiatric, and psychological associations. Outside the United States, in countries with state-sponsored religions, shamanic healing practices sometimes are illegal. C. Continuing education Continuing education is done primarily by the tutelary spirits and by the experiences of one’s healing practice. III. RELATIONS WITH CONVENTIONAL MEDICINE Physicians and psychotherapists who have come to understand the value of shamanic practices through firsthand experiential training and personal experimentation commonly wish to add such practices as a spiritual dimension of their own work or to refer patients to shamanic practitioners for complementary treatment. However, psychotherapists need to recognize that shamanism differs radically from Western psychotherapy in that shamanism operates on the basis of the reality of spirits. Also, in the United States, for example, health professionals tend to be inhibited from attempting to use shamanism due to governmental laws and regulations and professional organizations that prohibit them from practicing spiritual healing or even making referrals to spiritual practitioners.Such generalized conventional distrust of spiritual treatment needs to be replaced with specific knowledge about particular modes of practice and their possible complementarity. In the interests of developing such knowledge, significant support is needed for clinical studies of the effectiveness of shamanic practices. Only by taking seriously the most time-tested system of mind/body/spirit healing known to humanity can holistically oriented policies emerge that do not blindly forbid the nonexclusive treating of the spiritual aspects of illness and injury. PROSPECTS FOR THE FUTURE Despite all obstacles, core shamanic healing practices are becoming increasingly embraced and utilized by ever-larger numbers of people in all walks of life, both as practitioners and patients. In addition, indigenous shamanism is undergoing a revival worldwide in connection with a decline of missionization, colonialism, and authoritarian governments, and the reemergence of local ethnic pride and indigenous nationalism. There is every indication that, worldwide, the shamanic treatment of illness is going to become ever more important as it demonstrates its practical healing results, just as it has done for thousands of years cross.culturally. In our opinion, the West has begun a major paradigm shift from a conventionally ethnocentric and exclusionary health treatment to a comprehensive approach that includes shamanism as a spiritual complement to nonspiritual healing practices. Adapted from “Core Practices in the Shamanic Treatment of Illness.” Shamanism (2000), Vol. 13, Nos. 1 & 2 (combined issue), pp. 19–30, by Michael Harner, PhD, and Sandra Harner, PhD. CONTRIBUTORS TO THE CELESTIA STUDY Rob AshbyScott Balderson Darla Barclay (deceased) Katia Bask Datch Baudisch Bill Brunton Sandra Bundy Mujiba Cabugos Sally Cantrell Nancy DunnKen Emerson Amanda Foulger Nicolina Halvorson (often referred to as “NH” in this book) Carroll Herkimer Marcia Herman Terry Jackson Lora Jansson Bradford Keeney, PhD Sharon Kehoe Irene Lo Julia Meridith Joana Morris Jim Nourse Ozmo Piedmont E. Pierson Diane Polasky Catherine Rose Kim Roseland Pamela Sampel Karrie Sawyer Tom Snell Robbie Staufer Kappy Strahan Carol Faulkner Swim Roger Keith Swim and several anonymous UMR contributors Note: After an extensive search, not all contributors could be located for written permission. If a contributor has been overlooked or wishes to request a change in his or her listing, please contact the executive director of FSS at info@shamanism.org. Any updates to the contributor list will be made in the next printing of the book. NOTES A reminder: The acronyms MONOR and UMR refer, respectively, to the Mapping of Nonordinary Reality (MONOR) project of the Foundation for Shamanic Studies and “unpublished MONOR reports” (UMR). This project involves collecting and archiving shamanic knowledge, including almost five thousand reports by Westerners about what they found in their shamanic journeys into nonordinary reality, which have been used as the main source for this book’s accounts. INTRODUCTION 1. Eliade, Shamanism, 135. 2. M. Harner, The Way of Shaman, 31. 3. In a recent anthropological journal, it was said that I left anthropology when I “entered the ‘real’ world of the Shuar,” formerly called the “Jívaro.” (See Rubenstein, “On the Importance of Visions among the Amazonian Shuar.”) However, I never left anthropology, only academia, in order to expand the boundaries of anthropology and knowledge. 4. At present the Shamanic Knowledge Conservatory is closed to nonstaff until funds are found for a librarian. 5. Speaking of scholarship, those readers familiar with my research on ecological and economic factors involved in human social evolution (e.g., M. Harner, “Population Pressure and the Social Revolution of Agriculturalists”) may wonder how I can reconcile these topics with my research on shamanism. The answer is simple: I do not need to reconcile them, for they deal with two different realities, ordinary and nonordinary. The two realities sometimes can overlap, such as in healing and gaining wisdom, and that gives me hope for our planet’s future. I see the two pursuits as complementary and necessary for the advancement of human knowledge and the survival of life on Earth. 6. E.g., Cowan 1996; Ingerman 2004. 1. SPIRIT POWER AND THE CAVE 1. de Angulo, “The Background of Religious Feeling,” 354. 2. M. Harner, “Tribal Wisdom,” 163. “Hearing voices” is not the same as visual perception and is not a recommended beginning path to shamanism. 3. Benedict, “The Concept of the Guardian Spirit.” 4. Cline, “Religion and World View,” 139. 5. M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, 10–16. 6. Cline, “Religion and World View,” 133–82. 7. Ibid., 137–42. 8. Ibid., 138. 9. Park, “Paviotso Shamanism,” 98; and Shamanism in Western North America, 26–29. 10. Park, Shamanism in Western North America, 28. 11. Ibid., 27. 12. Raymond Hoferer, the late Paviotso Ghost Dance Chief of the Walker River people, told me in May 2006 that the cave power quest is no longer practiced. 13. Park, Shamanism in Western North America, 27. 14. M. Harner, “Wounded Knee,” 1973. 15. At no point during the cave quest did I experience seeing phosphenes or any imagery other than the appearance of Elieth as described. 16. For more details about some spirits in our world, see Chapter 4. 2. WE EXIST! THE SPIRITS CALL FOR RECOGNITION 1. During a presentation by Michael Harner at the annual meeting of the Transpersonal Psychology Association, Asilomar Conference Center, Pacific Grove, California. Anonymous, August 1993. 2. Personal communication, Dr. William H. Wilson, August 2, 2012, August 2, 2012, facilitated by the kind offices of Dr. Leanne Hinton. 3. M. Harner, Unpublished field, experiential, and case data, 1952– 2009. 4. M. Harner, Unpublished field, experiential, and case data, 1952– 2009. 5. M. Harner, Unpublished field, experiential, and case data, 1952– 2009. At the “Three-Year Program of Advanced Initiations in Shamanism & Shamanic Healing,” Amanda Foulger, 2008. 6. Ken Emerson, April 2011, UMR. 3. THE SEARCH 1. Narby and Huxley, Shamans through Time. 2. Cf. M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, xvi. 3. Lévy-Bruhl, Les fonctions mentales. See also Lowie, The History of Ethnological Theory, 216–21. 4. Jaynes, The Origin of Consciousness. 5. Devereux, “Shamans as Neurotics,” 12. See also Silverman, “Shamans and acute schizophrenia.” 6. La Barre, Ghost Dance. 7. Jung, The Red Book, 249 n. 161. 8. Ibid., 246, 249. I am indebted to Kevin Turner for calling this passage to my attention. 9. Eliade, Shamanism, 306. 10. For information on Cushing, see Green, Zuni: Selected Writings of Frank Hamilton Cushing. 11. For more information, see M. Harner, The Jívaro, 1–6. 12. Ibid., 84, 90–91, 134–35 passim. 13. In a later stay with the Shuar, I had the fortune to experience the acquisition of spirit power with the aid of powerful plants at a sacred waterfall, as recounted in The Way of the Shaman. 14. M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, 1–8. 15. Dick Kendig is deceased, but Dorothy survives and has given me permission to use their real names. 16. At that time I had not heard of William Burroughs’s experiments with yagé, the Colombian name for ayahuasca. See Burroughs and Ginsberg, The Yage Letters, 1963. 17. For more information, see M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, xiii– xvi, 46–51. 18. I revisited them in 1964, 1969, and 1973. Some of the results are recounted in M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, 8–18. 19. M. Harner, “The Role of Hallucinogenic Plants in European Witchcraft.” 20. Wasson and Heim, Les champignons hallucinogènes du Mexique. 21. Hofmann, LSD: My Problem Child. 22. Huxley, The Doors of Perception. 23. See Metzner, Birth of a Psychedelic Culture. 24. For example, Wasson and Heim, Les champignons hallucinogènes du Mexique. 25. For example, Castaneda, The Teachings of Don Juan. 26. Wasson and Wasson, Mushrooms, Russia, and History. 27. A foot drum usually consists of board planks covering a hole in the ground, act ing as a resonance chamber. Usually up to three persons can simultaneously dance and drum on it. 28. Bogoras, “The Chuckchee-Religion,” 424. 29. Personal observation and participation, 1994 and 1999. 30. See Neher, “Auditory Driving”; M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, 31, 50–53; Max field, Effects of Rhythmic Drumming; and Turow, “Auditory Driving as a Ritual Technology.” 31. For example, view Heick and Mueller, The Sucking Doctor, cited in the bibliography. 32. M. Harner, Unpublished field, experiential, and case data, 1952– 2009. 33. Cf. Ridington, Trail to Heaven. 34. Notably among the Amur River peoples of eastern Siberia. M. Harner, Unpublished field, experiential, and case data, 1952–2009. 35. M. Harner, Unpublished field, experiential, and case data, 1952– 2009. 36. Mänchen-Helfen, Reise ins asiatische Tuwa, 117. 37. Personal communication from a Mongolian shaman, 2012. 38. Personal communication, Ailo Gaup, 1993. 39. For example, see M. Harner, ed., Hallucinogens and Shamanism. 40. Neher, “Auditory Driving.” 41. Neher, “A Physiological Explanation.” See also Neher, “Auditory Driving.” 42. Jilek, Salish Indian Mental Health and Culture Change, 74–75. 43. Rouget, Music and Trance; Turow, “Auditory Driving as a Ritual Technology.” 44. For example, S. Harner, Immune and Affect Response to Shamanic Drumming; S. Harner and Tryon, “Psychoimmunological Effects of Shamanic Drumming”; Maxfield, “The Journey of the Drum.” 45. See Townsend, “Individualist Religious Movements.” 4. OUR WORLD: SHAMANS AND SPIRITS 1. Ballard, “Mythology of Southern Puget Sound,” 129. 2. Eliade, Shamanism, 5. 3. For more information on states of consciousness, ordinary and nonordinary reality, and shamanism, see M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman. 4. Eliade, Shamanism, 85. 5. Baer and Snell, “An Ayahuasca Ceremony among the Matsigenka,” 61, 70. 6. Elkin, Aboriginal Men of High Degree (1977), 85. 7. Park, “Paviotso Shamanism,” 103. 8. M. Harner, “The Sound of Rushing Water,” 28; M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, 115–30. 9. Rasmussen, Intellectual Culture of the Iglulik Eskimos, 113. 10. For example, Bogoras, “The Chukchee-Religion,” 374, 413. 11. For example, Popov, “Sereptie Djarouskin of the Nganasans.” 12. For example, Peri and Wharton, “Sucking Doctor,” 30, 34. 13. Thalbitzer, “The Heathen Priests of East Greenland,” 3. 14. M. Harner, The Jívaro, 116–25, 154. 15. M. Harner, field notes, 1960–61. 16. Cf. Rasmussen, Intellectual Culture of the Iglulik Eskimos. 17. Wallace, Miracles and Modern Spiritualism (1896). 18. Gayton, “Yokuts-Mono Chiefs and Shamans,” 390. 19. M. Harner, The Jívaro, 134–43. 20. M. Harner, “A Possible Survival of Celtic Shamanism in Ireland,” 3, 9. 21. For example, M. Harner, The Jívaro, 157–60. 22. M. Harner, Unpublished field, experiential, and case data, 1952– 2009. 23. M. Harner, “A Core Shamanic Theory of Dreams,” Shamanism 2010: 3. 5. THE JOURNEY TO OTHER WORLDS 1. See also Eliade, Shamanism, 259ff. 2. See also Eliade, Shamanism, 269ff. 3. Bogoras, “Ideas of Space and Time in the Conception of Primitive Religion,” 235. 4. Ibid., 205–265. 5. Few ethnographers obtained firsthand descriptions from indigenous shamans regarding what they had just experienced when journeying. The task to find such cases remains challenging and requires a massive project in itself. 6. Please see the Acknowledgments section. 7. A diligent effort was made to locate the writers of the journey accounts to obtain permission to publish them here, and to give their names. If someone was overlooked or could not be found, please advise the Executive Director of the Foundation for Shamanic Studies so that future printings of this book can be changed if necessary. Alternatively, a person’s report can be eliminated from future printings of the book if requested. The email address of the Foundation is info@shamanism.org. 6. THE WESTERNERS’ FIRST JOURNEYS: THE LOWER WORLD AND POWER ANIMALS 1. Rasmussen, Intellectual Culture of the Iglulik Eskimos, 119. 2. M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, 71–72, 93. 3. Ibid., 57–68. 4. For background regarding them in Native North America, see Benedict, “The Concept of the Guardian Spirit in North America.” 5. M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, 58. 6. For example, M. Harner, “The Sound of Rushing Water” and The Way of the Shaman. 7. The perfume to which they were referring came from little bags of sweet smelling seeds that they hung around their necks. 8. M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, 76–103. 9. Ibid., 24–38. 10. Jung, Memories, Dreams, Reflections, 158–61. 11. Personal communication, Bill Graves, Pomo shaman, Upper Lake, California. 1952. 12. Since we are using auditory driving, not ayahuasca, do not expect to encounter its characteristic reptilian forms I mention elsewhere (such as M. Harner, The Jívaro, 6–7). Those forms tend to be part of the effects of ayahuasca. When the potion is strong and properly prepared, drinkers often see reptiles and felines in the Middle and Lower World. (See M. Harner, “Common Themes in South American Indian Yagé Experiences” and Naranjo, “Psychological Aspects of the Yagé Experience.”) This does not seem to be typical of journeyers using auditory driving. 13. No name, no date. UMR. 14. No name, no date. UMR. 15. Eliade, Shamanism, 94. 16. No name, no date. UMR. 17. Anonymous, August 16, 1988. UMR. 18. Beveridge, The Art of Scientific Investigation. 7. SHAMANIC ASCENSION: HISTORY, FOLKLORE, AND KNOWLEDGE 1. Adaptation by Cloutier, Spirit, Spirit, 61–63. Reprinted by permission, Copper Beech Press, © 1980 by David Cloutier. 2. M. Harner, “The Role of Hallucinogenic Plants in European Witchcraft.” 3. For example, Manker, “Die lappische Zaubertrommel, II,” 19ff., 61ff., 124ff. 4. On both these trips I was accompanied by the late Heimo Lappalainen (a Finnish ethnologist and friend who acted as interpreter), and on one of them, also by my wife, Sandra Harner. 5. After great difficulty, we found one individual in northern Norway during the early 1980s who agreed to make a classic Sami “bowl” drum with a painted cosmological skin head, with its reindeer antler divination “hammer” and bone pointer, along with instructions on its use. Another type of Sami drum from northern Finland was acquired in 2012. Great secrecy regarding the identity of the drum makers was required in both cases. One of the two drums is kept in the Shamanic Knowledge Conservatory of the Foundation for Shamanic Studies in Marin County, California. The other is in a private collection. 6. M. Harner, Unpublished field, experiential, and case data, 1952– 2009. 7. Ibid. 8. Personal communications from Ulchi and Nanai shamans of the lower Amur River region of southeastern Siberia while visiting Seattle, Washington, 1996. 9. Personal communication, Vladimir Basilov, Moscow, 1982. 10. See also Walsh, The World of Shamanism, 157–64. 11. Except where it lingered a while among the Sami, as noted on page 98–101. 12. For example, Wilbert, “Tobacco and Shamanistic Ecstasy,” 63. 13. Schröder, “Zur Religion der Tujen des Sininggebietes,” 225. 14. M. Harner, “The Role of Hallucinogenic Plants in European Witchcraft.” 15. Ibid., 144. 16. Bogoras, “The Chukchee-Religion,” 331. 17. Ibid. 18. See the Sami drum in Plate 6 that shows a figure (a god or shaman) on a sled pulled by a reindeer. While the Sami probably had a role in the origins of the Santa Claus myth, there seems little support for recent popular assertions that the Sami used the Amanita muscaria mushroom to make their shamanic journeys. A Sami shaman I have known for years told me in 2012 that he knew of no historical or traditional information indicating the Sami use of the mushrooms for shamanic journeying, although he said it was known that they used them in other shamanic rituals. He prefers to remain anonymous. 19. Irving, A History of New York, 81. 20. For example, Anisimov, “Cosmological Concepts,” 85–89, 93, 96. 21. Bacigalupo, Shamans of the Foye Tree. 22. M. Harner, Unpublished field, experiential, and case data, 1952– 2009. 23. For example, Anisimov, “Cosmological Concepts,” 85–89, 93, 96; Partanen, “A description of Buriat Shamanism.” 24. Cf. Eliade, Shamanism, 259–66, 269–74. 25. Harva, “Der Baum des Lebens,” 41, 57; Harva, “Finno-Urgic [and] Siberian Mythology,” 341; Harva, “Die religiösen Vorstellungen,” 58ff. 26. Polomé, “Germanic Religion,” 524–25; see also Harva above. 27. For example, Eriksson, “Saami Shamanism”; M. Harner, “The Role of Hallucinogenic Plants in European Witchcraft”; Rydving, The End of Drum-Time, 56–92. 28. See Baer and Snell, “An Ayahuasca Ceremony.” 29. Personal communication, Dr. Batbayar Conchidorj, Mongolian National University, 2008. 30. Polomé, “Germanic Religion,” 525. 31. Anisimov, “Cosmological Concepts,” 86. 32. For example, Birlea, “Folklore,” 365. 33. M. Harner, Unpublished field, experiential, and case data, 1952– 2009. 34. G. Turner, Samoa, 199. 35. Harva, “Der Baum des Lebens,” 41, 57; Harva, “Finno-Urgic [and] Siberian Mythology,” 341; Harva, “Die religiösen Vorstellungen,” 58ff. 36. Eliade, Shamanism, 409. 37. See Roerich, Shambhala. 38. Ibid. 39. Goldman, “The Cubeo.” 40. Mooney, The Ghost-Dance Religion, 970. Today, there is widespread use of this song, with a new melody, to honor the Ghost Dance prophet Wovoka, with a word changed: “Wearing my long wing feathers as I fly.” 41. Bogoras, “The Chukchee-Religion,” 331. 42. Räsänen, “Regenbogen-Himmelsbrücke.” 43. Eliade, Shamanism, 118, 132–43. 44. Elkin, Aboriginal Men of High Degree (1945), 139–40. 8. DRUMMING OVER THE RAINBOW: WESTERNERS ASCEND TO THE UPPER WORLD 1. Transcribed by Mongush Kenin-Lopsan. Kenin-Lopsan, Calling the Bear Spirit, 24. 2. Odigan, Chosen by the Spirits, 132. 3. Personal communications with Tuvan shamans and Foundation for Shamanic Studies field-workers in Tuva, including those of FSS Europa, 1994–2010. 4. Ridington, Trail to Heaven. 5. Bacigalupo, Shamans of the Foye Tree. 6. See M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, 50–53, for details regarding the drumbeat. 7. E. Turner, “The Reality of Spirits,” 29. After contemplating her experiences during the ascension, she realized that the spirits were teaching her that they were real, not a creation of her imagination. 8. Drury, The Elements of Shamanism, viii–ix. 9. Ibid., ix. 10. No name, no date. UMR. 11. Personal report, Bradford Keeney, PhD, February 2, 2007. 12. Scott Balderson, June 1992. UMR. 13. Julia Meredith, November 19, 1984. UMR. 14. Kappy Strahan, October 14–19, 2001. UMR. 15. Anonymous, 1995–98. UMR. 16. For example, Bogoras, “The Chukchee-Religion,” 331; Elkin, Aboriginal Men of High Degree (1945), 86. 17. Elkin, Aboriginal Men of High Degree (1945), and Howitt, Native Tribes, 501ff. 18. See M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, 23, 109–12. 19. No name, no date. UMR. 20. The patented device is kept at the Shamanic Knowledge Conservatory of the Foundation for Shamanic Studies. 21. E. Pierson, 1995. UMR. 22. Anonymous, 1999–2002. UMR. 23. Catherine Rose, May 5–17, 2000. UMR. 24. No name, no date. UMR. 25. Sally Cantrell, 2011. UMR. 26. Irene Lo, October 14, 2001. UMR. 27. Anonymous, no date. UMR. 28. Lora Jansson, October 21, 2002. UMR. 29. Datch Baudisch, October 28–November 2, 2001. UMR. 30. Katia Bask, 1998. UMR. 31. Nancy Dunn, 2000. UMR. 32. Marcia Herman, June 4, 1996. UMR. 33. Joana Morris, October 1998. UMR. 9. TEACHERS—COMPASSIONATE SPIRITS WHO ADVISE 1. Ridington, Trail to Heaven, 93. 2. Popov, “Sereptie Djarouskin of the Nganasans,” 141. 3. Sharon Kehoe, 1987. UMR. 4. Karrie Sawyer, 1992. UMR. 5. No name, no date. UMR. 6. No name, no date. UMR. 7. No name, no date. UMR. 8. No name, no date. UMR. 9. No name, no date. UMR. 10. Eliade, Shamanism, 93ff., 96ff. 11. No name, no date. UMR. 10. TEACHERS—COMPASSIONATE SPIRITS WHO HEAL 1. M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, 113–34. 2. For example, Achterberg, Imagery in Healing. 3. Ozmo Piedmont, November 19, 1990. UMR. 4. Anonymous, no date. UMR. 5. Diane Polasky, October 27–28, 1990. UMR. 6. M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, 110. 7. No name, no date. UMR. 8. For more information, see M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, 113– 30. 9. For example, see Eliade, Shamanism, 202. 10. No name, no date. UMR. 11. Anonymous, November 2, 1993. UMR. 12. Jim Nourse, May 14, 1985. UMR. 13. Anonymous, November 23, 1992. UMR. 11. COSMIC DISMEMBERMENT, UNION, AND HEALING POWER 1. For example, see Eliade, Shamanism, 36ff; 53ff. 2. Popov, “Sereptie Djarouskin of the Nganasans,” 84–95. 3. No name, August 1987. UMR. 4. M. Harner, The Jívaro, 143; M. Harner, Unpublished field, experiential, and case data, 1952–2009. 5. Eliade, Shamanism, 21. 6. M. Harner, The Jívaro, 138. 7. Rasmussen, Intellectual Culture of the Iglulik Eskimos, 112. 8. Ibid., 118–19. 9. Peters, “Mystical Experience in Tamang Shamanism.” 10. For example, see Elkin, Aboriginal Men (1977), 49–50. 11. Métraux, “Le shamanisme chez les indiens,” 216. 12. M. Harner, Unpublished field, experiential, and case data, 1952– 2009. Among the Reindeer Inuit, I found that quartz crystals were unknown and therefore not part of the shamans’ practice. 13. Elkin, Aboriginal Men (1945), 94. 14. Ibid., 85. 15. Ksenofontov, Legendy i Rasskazy u Yakutov, 44–95, cited in Eliade, Shamanism, 37. 16. Spencer and Gillen, The Northern Tribes of Central Australia, 480–81. 17. Ibid., 487–88. 18. Berndt, “Wuradjeri Magic and Clever Men” (1946), 334–38. 19. Eliade, Shamanism, 138. 20. M. Harner, Unpublished field, experiential, and case data, 1952– 2009; Elkin, Aboriginal Men (1945), 44, 103, 120. 21. Nicolina Halvorson, August 17, 1988. UMR. 22. Spencer and Gillen, The Northern Tribes of Central Australia, 480–81. 23. Rasmussen, The Intellectual Culture of Iglulik Eskimos. 24. Mujiba Cabugos, August 21, 1987. UMR. 25. Personal communication, Larry Peters, August 13, 2001. For background information on Tamang shamanism, see Peters, “Mystical Experience in Tamang Shamanism.” 26. See Evans-Wentz (ed.), Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines, 277–334. 27. Anonymous, June 6, 2007. UMR. 28. Tom Snell, October 21, 2002. UMR. 29. Catherine Rose, November 1999. UMR. 30. Darla Barclay, May 5–10, 2002. UMR. 31. Robbie Staufer, October 12–16, 2007. UMR. 32. Kim Roseland, October 21–26, 2007. UMR. 33. Quasha, “Speech by Essie Parish.” 12. SPIRITS, HEAVENS, AND SPIRITUAL FREEDOM 1. Kant, Vorlesungen über Psychologie, 132. See also M. Harner, “Science, Spirits, and Core Shamanism.” 2. Popper, The Logic of Scientific Discovery, 63, 68–69. 3. While his book first appeared in 1874, it was followed by other editions, the last one being published in 1896. 4. Wallace, Miracles and Modern Spiritualism (1896), xvi. 5. Bush, “Distressing Western Near-Death Experiences,” 81. 6. Tart, “Dialogue with Michael Harner” transcript, 4. 7. Ibid. 8 Ibid., 5. 9. For example, Grof, When the Impossible Happens. Stanislav Grof devotes this innovative book to accounts of various “impossible” phenomena he has witnessed and views as synchronicities. 10. I first wrote about my experiments regarding the unbound shaman phenomenon in 1999 (M. Harner, “Science, Spirits, and Core Shamanism”). Until 2003, I taught only the very most advanced students this skill. I had discovered that the tighter the bindings, the easier it was to get free—in my view because the spirits were likely to feel compassion proportional to the suffering of the person asking for their help. At that time I also shared the discovery with anthropologist Bill Lyon, a student of the yuwipi practice. 11. Webster’s New Universal Unabridged Dictionary. 12. Walsh, The World of Shamanism, 157–64. Also, M. Harner, “Unpublished Lectures in Shamanism,” 1990 and subsequent years. 13. No name, March 17, 1985. UMR. 14. No name, August 26, 1982. UMR. 15. Rob Ashby, 2000. UMR. 16. Terry Jackson, June 13, 1988. UMR. 17. Eliade, ed., Encyclopedia of Religion, vol. 16 (Index), 278. 18. Ibid., vol. 11, 188. 19. Widengren, The Ascension of the Apostle, 7. 20. Ibid., 40. 21. Harva, “Die religiösen Vorstellungen,” 172. 22. Widengren, The Ascension of the Apostle, 22–24. 23. Ibid., 7 passim. On page 7, Widengren notes that use of the word “book” instead of “tablet” was occurring “perhaps when tablets were becoming obsolete as vehicles of writing.” 24. No name, July 2, 1981. UMR. 25. Pamela Sampel, 2000. UMR. 26. No name, January 1983. UMR. 27. Widengren, The Ascension of the Apostle, 80, 80 n. 4, 84. 28. Sandra Bundy, 2008. UMR. 29. Personal communications, 2010, 2011, and 2012. AFTERWORD: THE CAVE AGAIN 1. Cline, “Religion and World View,” 137. 2. Ibid., 148. 3. Ibid., 143. 4. Ibid. 5. Ibid., 138 passim, 144. 6. Ibid., 138. 7. Ibid., 136, 138. 8. Guthrie, The Nature of Paleolithic Art, 128ff. 9. Duday and Garcia, “L’ichnologie ou la mémorie des roches,” 64. APPENDIX B: VISITING THE LOWER WORLD TO COMPARE EXPERIENCES 1. M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, 24–38. 2. M. Harner, Unpublished field, experiential, and case data, 1952– 2009. 3. M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, 25. 4. Ibid., 25–26. APPENDIX D: CORE SHAMANISM AND HEALING: INFORMATION FOR PHYSICIANS AND HEALTH PROFESSIONALS The summary presented in this appendix was adapted from “Core Practices in the Shamanic Treatment of Illness,” Shamanism (2000), vol. 13, nos. 1 & 2 (combined issue), 19–30, by Michael Harner, PhD, and Sandra Harner, PhD. 1. M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman. 2. M. Harner, “A Core Shamanic Theory.” 3. Cowan, Shamanism as a Spiritual Practice. 4. Darwin, On the Origin of Species. 5. Darwin, The Descent of Man. 6. M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, xix–xxii, 21–22. 7. E. Turner, “The Reality of Spirits,” 28–32. 8. Dossey, Healing Words, 150–55. 9. For example, see Neher, “Auditory Driving” and “A Physiological Explanation;” Maxfield, “Effects of Rhythmic Drumming” and “The Journey of the Drum;” S. Harner, Immune and Affect Response; and S. Harner and W. Tryon, “Psychoimmunological Effects,” 196–204. 10. For example, M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, 31. 11. Ibid., 116–18. 12. M. Harner, Unpublished field, experiential, and case data, 1952– 2009. 13. M. Harner, The Jívaro, 155. 14. These views on soul retrieval for Westerners evolved during the past decade and led to the development of core soul retrieval. Its methodology differs from that given in Ingerman, Soul Retrieval, and necessitates specific training. 15. M. Harner, Unpublished Lectures in Shamanism, 1978–2011. 16. M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, 69–72. 17. For the sucking extraction technique, see M. Harner, The Way of the Shaman, 113–30. 18. The Foundation’s address is P.O. Box 1939, Mill Valley, California 94942; info@shamanism.org; www.shamanism.org. 19. See note 24. BIBLIOGRAPHY Achterberg, Jeanne. Imagery in Healing: Shamanism and Modern Medicine. Boston: Shambhala Books, 1985. Anisimov, A. F. “Cosmological Concepts of the People of the North.” In Studies in Siberian Shamanism, edited by H. N. Michael. University of Toronto Press/The Arctic Institute of North America, 1963. Baer, Gerhard, and Wayne W. Snell. “An Ayahuasca Ceremony among the Matsigenka (Eastern Peru).” Zeitschrift für Ethnologie 99, nos. 1–2 (1974): 63–80. Bacigalupo, Ana Mariella. Shamans of the Foye Tree: Gender, Power, and Healing among the Chilean Mapuche. Austin: University of Texas Press, 2007. Ballard, Arthur C. “Mythology of Southern Puget Sound.” Anthropology (University of Washington) 3, no. 2 (1929): 31–150. Benedict, Ruth F. “The Concept of the Guardian Spirit in North America.” Memoirs of the American Anthropological Association 29 (1923). Berndt, Ronald Murray. “Wuradjeri Magic and Clever Men.” Oceania 17, no. 4 (1946): 327–65. ———. “Wuradjeri Magic and Clever Men (Continued).” Oceania 18, no. 1 (1947): 60–86. Beveridge, William I. B. The Art of Scientific Investigation. Toronto: William Heinemann, 1950. Birlea, Ovidiu. “Folklore.” In The Encyclopedia of Religion 5, edited by Mircea Eliade and Charles J. Adams, 363–70. New York: Macmillan, 1987. Bogoras, Waldemar. “The Chukchee–Religion.” Memoirs of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 11, edited by Franz Boas. Vol. 7, Part 2 of the Jesup North Pacific Expedition. Leiden: Brill, and New York: Stechert, 1907. ———. “Ideas of Space and Time in the Conception of Primitive Religion.” American Anthropologist, Vol. 27, No. 2 (1925): 205–66. Breuil, Abbé Henri. Four Hundred Centuries of Cave Art. Montignac, France: Centre d’Études et Documentation Préhistoriques, 1952. Burroughs, William and Allen Ginsberg. The Yage Letters. San Francisco: City Lights, 1963. Bush, Nancy Evans. “Distressing Western Near-Death Experiences: Finding a Way through the Abyss.” In The Handbook of Near-Death Experiences: Thirty Years of Investigation, edited by Janice Miner Holden, Bruce Greyson, and Debbie James. Santa Barbara: Praeger, 2009. Caesar, Julius. The Conquest of Gaul. Translated by S. A. Hanford. London: Penguin, 1951 (originally 51 BCE). Castaneda, Carlos. The Teachings of Don Juan: A Yaqui Way of Knowledge. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1968. Cline, Walter. “Religion and World View.” In The Sinkaietk or Southern Okanagan of Washington, edited by Leslie Spier. General Series in Anthropology, No. 6 (Contributions from the Laboratory of Anthropology, 2), Menasha, Wisconsin: Banta, 1938. Cloutier, David. Spirit, Spirit: Shaman Songs, Incantations. Versions based on texts recorded by anthropologists. Providence: Copper Beech Press, 1973. Cowan, Tom. Shamanism as a Spiritual Practice for Daily Life. Freedom: Crossing Press, 1996. Darwin, Charles. On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection. London: John Murray, 1859. ———. The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex. New York: D. Appleton, 1871. de Angulo, Jaime. “The Background of Religious Feeling in a Primitive Tribe.” American Anthropologist 28, no. 2 (1926): 352–60. Devereux, George. “Shamans as Neurotics.” American Anthropologist 63, no. 5 (1961): 1088–90. Dossey, Larry. Healing Words: The Power of Prayer and the Practice of Medicine. San Francisco: Harper San Francisco, 1993. Drury, Nevill. The Elements of Shamanism. Shaftesbury, Dorset, UK: Element Books, 1989. Duday, H., and M. Garcia. “L’ichnologie ou la mémorie des roches.” In La mémorie 11 of Le concept de mémorie, edited by N. Navioloff, R. Jaffard, and P. Brenot, 55–66. Paris: Hartman, 1990. Eliade, Mircea, ed. The Encyclopedia of Religion. 16 vols. New York: Macmillan, 1987. ———. Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy. Bollingen Series 76. New York: Pantheon, 1964. Revised and enlarged from the original French edition (1951). Elkin, A. P. Aboriginal Men of High Degree. The John Murtagh Macrossan Memorial Lectures for 1944. University of Queensland, Sydney: Australasian Publishing, 1945. ———. Aboriginal Men of High Degree. 2nd ed. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1977. Eriksson, Jørgen I. “Saami Shamanism: the Noajdie Today.” The Foundation for Shamanic Studies Newsletter 1, no. 3 (1988–89): 3–9. Evans-Wentz, W. Y., ed. Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines. 2nd ed. London: Oxford University Press, 1958. Originally published in 1951. Gayton, Anna H. “Yokuts-Mono Chiefs and Shamans.” University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 24 (1930): 361–420. Goldman, Irving. “The Cubeo: Indians of the Northwest Amazon.” Illinois Studies in Anthropology 2 (1963). Urbana: University of Illinois Press. Green, Jesse, ed. Zuni: Selected Writings of Frank Hamilton Cushing. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1978. Grof, Stanislav. When the Impossible Happens: Adventures in Non-Ordinary Reality. Boulder, CO: Sounds True, 2006. Guthrie, R. Dale. The Nature of Paleolithic Art. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005. Harner, Michael J. “Common Themes in South American Indian Yagé Experiences.” In Hallucinogens and Shamanism, edited by Michael J. Harner, 155–75. New York: Oxford University Press, 1973. ———. “A Core Shamanic Theory of Dreams.” Shamanism 23 (2010): 2– 4. ———. “Dismemberment and Ecstatic Union.” Paper presented at the meeting of the International Society of Shamanistic Research, Nara, Japan, November 1995. ———. The Jívaro: People of the Sacred Waterfalls. Garden City, New York: Doubleday/Natural History Press, 1972. Revised edition published by UC Press in 1984. Unless otherwise noted, citations refer to the original edition. ———. “Population Pressure and the Social Evolution of Agriculturalists.” Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 26, no. 1 (1970): 67–86. ———. “A Possible Survival of Celtic Shamanism in Ireland.” Shamanism 5, no. 1 (1992). ———. “The Role of Hallucinogenic Plants in European Witchcraft.” In Hallucinogens and Shamanism, edited by Michael J. Harner, 125–50. New York: Oxford University Press, 1973. Originally presented in 1965 in the symposium “Hallucinogens and Shamanism,” at the annual meeting of the American Anthropological Association. ———. “Science, Spirits, and Core Shamanism.” Shamanism 12, no.1 (1999): 5–8. ———. “Shamanic Counseling.” In Shaman’s Path: Healing, Personal Growth, and Empowerment, edited by Gary Doore, 179–87. Boston: Shambhala, 1988. ———. “The Sound of Rushing Water.” Natural History Magazine 77, no. 6 (1968): 28–33, 60–61. ———. “Tribal Wisdom: The Shamanic Path.” In Higher Wisdom: Eminent Elders Explore the Continuing Impact of Psychedelics, edited by Roger Walsh and Charles S. Grob, 159–77. Albany: State University of New York Press, 2005. ———. Unpublished field, experiential, and case data, 1952–2009. ———. Unpublished Lectures in Shamanism, 1978–2011. Presented in shamanic trainings of the Foundation (formerly Center) for Shamanic Studies. ———. The Way of the Shaman: A Guide to Power and Healing. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1980. Also published by Bantam in 1982. Revised edition published by Harper & Row in 1990. Citations refer to the original edition. ———. “Wounded Knee.” New York Times, March 20, 1973. ———, ed. Hallucinogens and Shamanism. New York: Oxford University Press, 1973. Harner, Michael, and Sandra Harner. “Core Practices in the Shamanic Treatment of Illness.” Shamanism 13, nos. 1–2 (2000): 19–30. Harner, Sandra. Ema’s Odyssey: Shamanism for Healing and Spiritual Knowledge. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books, 2014. ———. Immune and Affect Response to Shamanic Drumming. Ann Arbor, Michigan: UMI, 1995. ———. “Shamanic Journeying and Immune Response: Hypothesis Testing.” Shamanism 16, no. 2 (2003): 9–14. ———. “Shamanic Journeying and Psychological Responses: Hypothesis Testing.” Shamanism 17, no. 2 (2004): 16–23. Harner, Sandra, and W. Tryon. “Psychoimmunological Effects of Shamanic Drumming.” In Northern Religions and Shamanism, edited by M. Hoppál and J. Pentikäinen. Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó, 1992. Harva (Holmberg), Uno. “Der Baum des Lebens.” Annales academiae scientarum fennicae, series B 16. Helsinki (1922–23). ———. “Die religiösen Vorstellungen der altaischen Völker.” FF Communications 52, no. 125 (1938). Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia. First published in Finnish, 1933. Harva (Holmberg), Uno. “Finno-Ugric [and] Siberian Mythology.” In The Mythology of All Races, volume 4, edited by John Arnott MacCullock. Boston: Archaeological Institute of America, Marshall Jones Co., 1927. Heick, William, and Gordon Mueller. The Sucking Doctor. DVD. Directed by William R. Heick, David Wayne Peri, and Robert Walter Wharton. Mill Valley, CA: The Foundation for Shamanic Studies, 2009. Originally a 1963 16mm film. Hofmann, Albert. LSD: My Problem Child. London: McGraw-Hill, 1980. Howitt, A.W. Native Tribes of South-East Australia. London: Macmillan and Co., 1904. Huxley, Aldous. The Doors of Perception. New York: Harper, 1954. Ingerman, Sandra. Shamanic Journeying: A Beginner’s Guide. Boulder, Colorado: Sounds True, 2004. Ingerman, Sandra. Soul Retrieval: Mending the Fragmented Self. San Francisco: Harper, 1991. Irving, Washington (under the pseudonym Diedrich Knickerbocker). A History of New York from the Beginning of the World to the End of the Dutch Dynasty. New York: George P. Putnam, 1848. Jaynes, Julian. The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1976. Jilek, Wolfgang G. Salish Indian Mental Health and Culture Change: Psychohygenic and Therapeutic Aspects of the Guardian Spirit Ceremonial. Toronto: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1974. Jung, C. G. Memories, Dreams, Reflections. Recorded and edited by Aniela Jaffe. Translated from the German. New York: Pantheon, 1961. ———. The Red Book. Liber Novus. Edited by Sonu Shamdasani. New York: W.W. Norton, 2009. Kant, Immanuel. Vorlesungen über Psychologie. Pforzheim: Rudolf Fischer, 1864. Katz, Richard. The Straight Path of the Spirit: Ancestral Wisdom and Healing Traditions in Fiji. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1993. Kenin-Lopsan, M. B. Calling the Bear Spirit: Ancient Shamanic Invocations and Working Songs from Tuva. Edited by Anna Kjellin and Aldynai Seden-Khuurak. Borange, Sweden: Kjellin, 2010. Ksenofontov, G. V. Legendy i Rasskazy u Yakutov, Buryat i Tungusov. 2nd ed. Moscow: Bezbozhnik, 1930. La Barre, Weston. Ghost Dance: The Origins of Religion. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1970. Lévy-Bruhl, Lucien. Les fonctions mentales dans les sociétés inférieures. Paris: Librairie Felix Alcan, 1910. ———. La mentalité primitive. Paris: Librairie Felix Alcan, 1922. Lowie, Robert H. The History of Ethnological Theory. New York: Farrar & Rinehart, 1937. Mänchen-Helfen, Otto. Reise ins asiatische Tuwa. Berlin: Der Bücherkreis, 1931. Manker, E. “Die lappische Zaubertrommel: eine ethnologische Monographie. II: Die Trommel als Urkunde Geistigen Lebens.” Acta Lapponica 6. Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell, 1950. Maxfield, Melinda C. “Effects of Rhythmic Drumming on EEG and Subjective Experience.” PhD diss., Institute of Transpersonal Psychology, 1990. Also University Microfilms, Ann Arbor, Michigan: UMI No. DPI 4292. ———. “The Journey of the Drum.” ReVision 16 (1994): 148–56. Métraux, Alfred. “Le Shamanisme chez les Indiens de l’Amérique du Sud tropicale, I.” Acta Americana 2 (1944). Metzner, Ralph. Birth of a Psychedelic Culture: Conversations about Leary, the Harvard Experiments, Millbrook, and the Sixties. Santa Fe, New Mexico: Synergetic Press, 2010. Mooney, James. The Ghost-Dance Religion and the Sioux Outbreak of 1890. Bureau of American Ethnology, Fourteenth Annual Report, 1892– 93, Part 2. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution, 1896. Naranjo, Claudio. “Psychological Aspects of the Yagé Experience in an Experimental Setting.” In Hallucinogens and Shamanism, edited by Michael J. Harner, 176–90. New York: Oxford University Press, 1973. Narby, Jeremy, and Francis Huxley, eds. Shamans through Time: 500 Years on the Path to Knowledge. New York: Tarcher/Putnam, 2001. Neher, Andrew. “Auditory Driving Observed with Scalp Electrodes in Normal Subjects.” Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 13, no. 3 (1961): 449–51. ———. “A Physiological Explanation of Unusual Behavior in Ceremonies Involving Drums.” Human Biology 34 (1964): 151–60. Odigan, Sarangerel. Chosen by the Spirits: Following Your Shamanic Calling. Rochester, VT: Destiny Books, 2001. Park, Willard Z. “Paviotso Shamanism.” American Anthropologist 36 (1934): 98–113. ———. Shamanism in Western North America: A Study of Cultural Relationships. Northwestern University Studies in the Social Sciences 2. Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1938. Partanen, Jorma. “A description of Buriat shamanism.” Translation of Text No. VIII in Pozdneyev’s Mongolian Chrestomathy. Helsinki: Société finno-ougrienne, 1941. Peri, David and Robert Wharton. “Sucking Doctor—Second Night: Comments by Doctor, Patient, and Singers.” Unpublished manuscript, n.d. Peters, Larry. “Mystical Experience in Tamang Shamanism.” ReVision 13, no. 2 (1990): 71–85. Polomé, Edgar C. “Germanic Religion.” In The Encyclopedia of Religion, volume 5, edited by Mircea Eliade. New York: Macmillan, 1987. Popov, A. A. “How Sereptie Djarouskin of the Nganasans (Tavgi Samoyeds) Became a Shaman” (1936). In Popular Beliefs and Folklore Tradition in Siberia, edited by V. Diószegi, 141. English translation revised by Stephen P. Dunn. Indiana University Publications, Uralic and Altaic Series 57, Thomas A. Sebeok, ed. Bloomington: Indiana University, 1968. Popper, Karl R. The Logic of Scientific Discovery. New York: Harper & Row, 1959. Originally published in 1934. Quasha, George. “Speech by Essie Parrish, Recorded March 14, 1972.” Alcheringa: Ethnopoetics 1 (1975): 27–29. Räsänen, Martti. “Regenbogen-Himmelsbrücke.” Studia Orientalia 14, no. 1 (1947). Rasmussen, Knud. Intellectual Culture of the Iglulik Eskimos. Report of the Fifth Thule Expedition 1921–24, vol. 7, no. 1. Copenhagen: Gyldendalske Boghandel, Nordisk Forlag, 1929. Ridington, Robin. Trail to Heaven: Knowledge and Narrative in a Northern Native Community. Vancouver: Douglas & McIntyre, 1988. Roerich, Nicholas. Shambhala. New York: F. A. Stokes, 1930. Rouget, Gilbert. Music and Trance: A Theory of the Relations between Music and Possession. Translated from French. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985. Rubenstein, Steven Lee. “On the Importance of Visions among the Amazonian Shuar.” Current Anthropology 53, no. 1 (2012). Rydving, Hakan. The End of Drum-Time: Religious Change among the Lule Saami, 1670s–1740s. Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis. Historia Religionum no. 12. 3rd (revised) edition (orig. 1993). Uppsala: 2004. Schröder, Dominik. “Zur Religion der Tujen des Sininggebietes (Kukunor).” Anthropos 48 (1953): 202–59. Silverman, J. “Shamans and acute schizophrenia.” American Anthropologist 65 (1967): 21–31. Spencer, Baldwin, and Frances James Gillen. The Northern Tribes of Central Australia. London and New York: Macmillan, 1904. Tart, Charles T., “Dialogue with Michael Harner.” Foundation for Shamanic Studies Annual Council Meeting (January 2009). Transcript of video recording. Thalbitzer, W. “The Heathen Priests of East Greenland.” Verhandlungen des XVI Internationalen Amerikanisten-Kongresses (1910): 447–64. Reprinted with comments by Michael Harner in Newsletter of the Foundation for Shamanic Studies 2, no. 3 (1990): 1–6. Townsend, Joan B. “Individualist Religious Movements: Core and Neo.shamanism.” Anthropology of Consciousness 15, no. 1 (2004): 1–9. Turner, Edith. “The Reality of Spirits.” ReVision 15, no. 1 (1992): 28–32. Turner, George. Samoa, a Hundred Years Ago and Long Before. With a preface by E. B. Tylor. London: Macmillan, 1884. Turow, Gabe. “Auditory Driving as a Ritual Technology: A Review and Analysis.” Religious Studies honors thesis, Stanford University, 2005. Wallace, Alfred Russel. Miracles and Modern Spiritualism. London: George Redway, 1874. ———. Miracles and Modern Spiritualism. Rev. ed. London: George Redway, 1896. Walsh, Roger. The World of Shamanism: New Views of an Ancient Tradition. Woodbury, MN: Llewellyn, 2007. Wasson, R. Gordon, and Roger Heim. Les champignons hallucinogènes du Mexique. Paris: Muséum national d’Histoire naturelle, 1958. Wasson, Valentina Pavlovna, and R. Gordon Wasson. Mushrooms, Russia and History. New York: Pantheon, 1957. Webster’s New Universal Unabridged Dictionary. New York: Random House (Barnes and Noble), 1996. Widengren, Geo. The Ascension of the Apostle and the Heavenly Book. Uppsala Universitets Arsskrift, no. 7. Uppsala: A. B. Lundequistska, 1950. Wilbert, Johannes. “Tobacco and Shamanistic Ecstasy among the Warao Indians of Venezuela.” In Flesh of the Gods: The Ritual Use of Hallucinogens, edited by Peter T. Furst. New York: Praeger, 1972. ABOUT THE AUTHOR Internationally renowned anthropologist Michael Harner pioneered the return of shamanism to the West and is the originator of core shamanism, a methodology founded on practices and principles shared by shamans across cultures worldwide. In 1979, he and his wife, Sandra Harner, established the Center for Shamanic Studies (which later became the nonprofit Foundation for Shamanic Studies) in order to return the lost knowledge of shamanism to contemporary life and to preserve the knowledge still practiced by remaining indigenous shamans. Harner has practiced shamanism since 1961, and the famed Siberian Buryat shaman Bo Bair Rinchinov once said of him “Michael Harner is a great shaman. He also proves that a person can be both a scientist and shaman.” Harner received his doctorate in anthropology in 1963 from the University of California, Berkeley. He taught there, at Columbia and Yale, and at the Graduate Faculty of the New School for Social Research, where he chaired the anthropology department. His many honors include the 2009 Pioneers in Integrative Medicine Award from California Pacific Medical Center’s Institute for Health & Healing, an honorary doctorate in shamanic studies from the California Institute of Integral Studies, and special academic recognition at the 2009 meeting of the American Anthropological Association, at which he was honored for his role in the exponential growth of the anthropological study of shamanism. His classic book The Way of the Shaman has long been considered the premier text on modern shamanism. 1. Panel of the Horses, Chauvet Cave, France. Aurignacian period, Upper Paleolithic, circa 31,000 years old. (Courtesy of the French Ministry of Culture and Communication, Regional Direction for Cultural Affairs, Rhône-Alpes region, Regional Department of Archaeology.) 2. Altai (Siberia) shaman. (From the collection of the Russian Museum of Ethnography, St. Petersburg, Russia. Collector M. P. Gryaznov, 1930s.) 3a. Amazonian Shuar (Jívaro) shaman, Natem Anank Nunink Nunkai, playing musical bow. (Photo by Catherine R. Nunkai, 2007.) 3b. Drawing of probable shaman, merged with Bison Spirit, playing musical bow. Trois Frères Cave in southwestern France. Upper Paleolithic, circa 15,000 years old. (From Abbé Henri Breuil, Four Hundred Centuries of Cave Art [Montignac, France: Centre d’Etudes et Documentation Prehistoriques, 1952]: 164–69.)4. Daur shaman with eye curtain, Inner Mongolia, China. (Photo by Meng Huiying, 2010.)5. Idol of Nganasan people, Siberia. (© 2004 Foundation for Shamanic 6. Sami shaman’s drum showing the three worlds. Pre-1801, northern Samiland (Torne Lappmark). The black-and-white rendition below the photograph clarifies the images on the drum. The shaman’s map of the nonordinary universe is drawn on the drum face, with horizontal lines dividing the worlds. The reindeer figure at the top right pulls a sled carrying a god or shaman toward the Upper World. The Upper World includes several god–spirit figures in human form. (State Museum of Ethnology, Munich, Germany. Photo by Marietta Weidner.) 7. Shaman’s drum of the Khakas people (Siberia). The Upper World, separated from the Middle World by a chain of triangles representing mountains, portrays various spirits, the sun, and other heavenly bodies. The spirits and gods of the Lower World are shown at the bottom of the drum. (From the collection of the Russian Museum of Ethnography, St. Petersburg, Russia. Collector A. V. Adrianov, 1909. © B&C Alexander/Arcticphoto.) 8. Map of the three worlds. Details discovered and recorded by Celestia Study contributor Carol Faulkner Swim. (From the Western collection of the Shamanic Knowledge Conservatory of the Foundation for Shamanic 9. Map of the three worlds. Details discovered and recorded by Roger Keith Swim, also a Celestia Study contributor. (From the Western collection of the Shamanic Knowledge Conservatory of the Foundation for Shamanic 10. Shaman of the Mapuche people (Chile) with drum and ascension ladder. (© Martin Thomas, Aachen, Germany.) Mesoweb Publications POPOL VUH Sacred Book of the Quiché Maya People Translation and Commentary by Allen J. Christenson 2007 Popol Vuh: Sacred Book of the Quiché Maya People. Electronic version of Popol Vuh: The Sacred Book of the Maya (University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, 2003). Mesoweb: www.mesoweb.com/publications/ Christenson/PopolVuh.pdf. To my wife, Janet Xa at nu saqil, at nu k'aslemal Chib'e q'ij saq ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This volume is the culmination of nearly twenty-five years of collaboration with friends and colleagues who have been more than generous with their time, expertise, encouragement, and at times, sympathy. It has become a somewhat clichéd and expected thing to claim that a work would not be possible without such support. It is nonetheless true, at least from my experience, and I am indebted to all those who helped move the process along. First and foremost, I would like to express my sincerest gratitude to my Maya teachers, colleagues, and friends who have selflessly devoted their time and knowledge to help carry out this project. Without their efforts, none of it would have ever gotten off the ground. I would like to particularly recognize in this regard don Vicente de León Abac, who, with patience and kindness, guided me through the complexity and poetry of K'iche' theology and ceremonialism. Without his wisdom, I would have missed much of the beauty of ancestral vision that is woven into the very fabric of the Popol Vuh. I dearly miss him. I would also like to acknowledge the profound influence that Antonio Ajtujal Vásquez had on this work. It was his kind and gentle voice that I often heard when I struggled at times to understand the ancient words of this text. Others who have aided this work include Diego Chávez Petzey, Nicolás Chávez Sojuel, Felix Choy, Gregorio Chuc, Juan Mendoza, Francisco Mendoza, and Juan Zárate. I am deeply indebted to Jim Mondloch for his extraordinary generosity in offering to read through the translation. His depth of knowledge with regard to K'iche' grammar, syntax, and modern usage were invaluable. I purchased a copy of his “Basic Quiché Grammar” in 1976 to help in my quest to learn the language at a time when such aids were very rare. The book was a steadfast friend and companion during the next few years. Not only was it a brilliant work but it proved to be just the size and weight to dispatch mosquitos on the wall of my adobe shack. I thus owe to him, not only much of my initial knowledge of the K'iche' language, but my red blood cell count in those days as well. I am also grateful to John Robertson for his guidance, particularly with regard to the orthography of the text. He was a patient educator to me when I began work with the K'iche' language nearly twenty-five years ago, helping to prepare a dictionary and grammar. He was an ideal boss and a wise teacher. It is a great honor for me to occupy the office next door to his at the university. I am sincerely indebted to my friend and colleague Ruud van Akkeren who went to extraordinary lengths to share with me his profound understanding of highland Maya ethnohistory. I value his knowledge, experience, and generosity in reading through various versions of this volume and offering his insights. As in much of what I do that is of worth in the academic world, I acknowledge the influence of my mentor, Linda Schele. As a graduate student, Linda encouraged me to complete the translation of the Popol Vuh at a time when I was content to throw up my hands after I had worked through the mythic sections. It was her love for the Maya people and passion for their language that reminded me why we take on overwhelming tasks such as this, and why it’s worth the price in life and heart that we put into them. Among the many who have contributed in invaluable ways to this project, I would like to recognize with my sincerest thanks the following individuals: Claude Baudez, Karen Bassie, James Brady, Linda Brown, Margaret Bruchez, Michael Carrasco, Garrett Cook, Doris Dant, John Early, Sam Edgerton, Enrique Florescano, John Fox, David Freidel, Stephen Houston, Kerry Hull, Julia G. Kappelman, Peter Keeler, Justin Kerr, Bob Laughlin, Bruce Love, John Monaghan, Dorie Reents-Budet, Julia Sanchez, Joel Skidmore, Carolyn Tate, Mark Van Stone, Bob Walch, Andrew Weeks, Jack Welch, and Diane Wirth. I would also like to thank my graduate students who keep me constantly on my toes and challenged with their curiosity and energy. Among these students, Spencer Jardine helped with the initial transcription of the text used in this volume, and Scott Brian created the beautiful maps. I am indebted to them for their efforts. TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE A little over twenty years ago I helped to compile a dictionary in the Quiché-Maya language in the mountains of northwestern Guatemala near a small village called Chihul. At the time, Quiché was almost completely an orally-communicated language, with very few native speakers who could read or write it. One summer evening, after a long day of work with one of my best sources, I realized that I had lost track of time and needed to hurry down to the valley where I had a small home before it got dark. The region had no electricity and hiking steep mountain trails at night was dangerous, particularly because of the numerous packs of wild (and often rabid) dogs that roamed freely about. I therefore started down a small footpath that appeared to be a more direct route than the usual winding road taken by buses. About a third the way down the mountainside, I passed an isolated adobe and thatch house built in a clearing surrounded by pine forest. A small group of men were seated on a low wooden bench in front of the house conversing. When they saw me, they called out a greeting and beckoned me to join them. After introductions were properly exchanged, a requirement in formal Quiché conversation, I was offered a warm cup of toasted corn coffee and a space on the bench was opened up for me to sit down. One of the men had heard that there was a fair-skinned young man that people called raqän us (mosquito legs) who was visiting in Chihul, and he asked if that would be me. My name is difficult to pronounce in Quiché, so I had been given that rather unfortunate nickname, derived no doubt from my lanky physique in those days. I told him that I was the one they had heard about. They asked what I was doing, and I explained that I was interested in collecting the words of his people so that I could carry them with me back to my own town beyond the mountains to the north. Another of the men was curious as to how I could “collect” words and carry them away, since he assumed that his language could only be spoken, not written. Quichés in that area had, of course, seen documents and books like the Bible written in Spanish but had little conception at that time that it was possible to use phonetic letters to record their own language. This is a great tragedy, because until about five hundred years ago the Maya were the most literate people in the Americas, preserving their history and culture with a sophisticated hieroglyphic script in hundreds of folded screen books. The Spanish conquest in the early sixteenth century was a devastating blow to Maya literacy in Mexico and Guatemala. Christian missionaries burned great numbers of hieroglyphic texts in an attempt to eradicate indigenous religious practices. Native scribes were singled out for persecution to such an extent that within one hundred years, the art of hieroglyphic writing had virtually disappeared from among the Maya people. My new friends were therefore very interested in the notes I had written that day in their language. Excited by the possibility of preserving their own thoughts in written form, they asked me to demonstrate how to write a number of words and phrases. After writing a few phrases for them in Quiché, I asked the oldest of them if he would like me to write something for him. He said that he did and I waited a long time for the words he wished me to write. Finally he asked me to record a few brief words of counsel for his son. I didn’t know it at the time but his five year old boy was the last of twelve children, all of whom had died in childhood, mostly to tuberculosis. That week his last surviving child had begun to cough up blood and he knew that his hope for posterity would inevitably die with him. By this time I knew I would never make it down to the valley before dark so my elderly friend invited me to stay in his corn loft. Before the others left for the night, I asked if they would like to hear the words of their fathers. This was greeted with indulgent smiles of disbelief, since few of their parents were alive and they were sure that I couldn’t have known them. But I told them that it wasn’t their fathers’ words that I carried with me, but rather those of their fathers’ fathers’ (repeated many times) fathers, dating back nearly five hundred years. I happened to have with me a copy of the Popol Vuh manuscript, a book that was compiled in the mid-sixteenth century at a town that still exists less than thirty miles from where we sat. I began to read from the first page of the book: THIS IS THE ACCOUNT of when all is still silent and placid. All is silent and calm. Hushed and empty is the womb of the sky. THESE, then, are the first words, the first speech. There is not yet one person, one animal, bird, fish, crab, tree, rock, hollow, canyon, meadow, or forest. All alone the sky exists. The face of the earth has not yet appeared. Alone lies the expanse of the sea, along with the womb of all the sky. There is not yet anything gathered together. All is at rest. Nothing stirs. All is languid, at rest in the sky. There is not yet anything standing erect. Only the expanse of the water, only the tranquil sea lies alone. There is not yet anything that might exist. All lies placid and silent in the darkness, in the night. All alone are the Framer and the Shaper, Sovereign and Quetzal Serpent, They Who Have Borne Children and They Who Have Begotten Sons. Luminous they are in the water, wrapped in quetzal feathers and cotinga feathers. (Popol Vuh, pp. 67-69) After I had read a page or two from the account of the creation of the earth, I stopped and waited for their reaction. No one spoke for some time. Finally, the elderly man with the sick boy asked if he might hold the unbound pages of the manuscript copy for a moment. He gently took it from my hands and with great care turned its pages. “These are the words of my ancient fathers?” he asked. “Yes.” “Do you know what you have done for them?” I wasn’t quite sure what he meant, so I didn’t answer at first. “You make them live again by speaking their words.” The word he used was k'astajisaj, meaning “to cause to have life,” or “to resurrect.” The written word has the power to survive the death of its author, to preserve the most precious souvenirs of human existence—thoughts, hopes, ideals, and acquaintance with the sacred. We tend to take writing for granted. The Maya do not. The ability to write words and have them preserved long after the death of the author is a miracle. Many of the larger highland Maya communities possess wooden chests containing books and clothing owned by their ancestors which they revere as precious relics. These objects are said to bear the k'ux, or “heart” of the ancestors. On special occasions, the contents are removed ceremonially to “feed” them with offerings of incense and prayers. Many of these books are of great antiquity. I attended the opening of one of these old chests in the town of Santiago Atitlán which contained a number of loose manuscript pages, birth and death registries, and several bound leather books, one of which I could see was a seventeenth century missal. When brought out into the open, such books are reverently offered incense and prayers, but no attempt is made to open them or read them. Partly this is because few contemporary Maya know how to read the early script of the colonial period, and partly out of respect for the words themselves. When the words of the ancestors are read, or spoken aloud, it is as if that person had returned from death to speak again. Reading ancient texts is therefore a very delicate matter, filled with peril if the words are not treated with sufficient respect. While working as an ethnographer and translator in the Guatemalan highlands, I collaborated with a number of Maya shaman-priests called aj q'ijab' (they of days, or daykeepers). Prior to reading the words of ancient Maya manuscripts like the Popol Vuh, it was customary for one of them, don Vicente de León Abac of Momostenango, to first purify my xeroxed copy of the text by waving copal incense smoke over it and asking forgiveness of the ancestors who had written the original for disturbing them. When I asked why he did this, he replied that to read the thoughts of ancient ancestors is to make their spirits present in the room and give them a living voice. Such power must be approached with great seriousness, and all care taken to be faithful to their original ideas in any transcription or translation. At the end of our work sessions, he politely dismissed the gods and ancestors involved in that day’s reading with his thanks and asked pardon for any offense we might have given. Most of the people who lived on the American continents prior to the arrival of Europeans lacked a written script. Even in Mesoamerica, where there was a long tradition of hieroglyphic writing among some of the ancient cultures of the region, such as the Maya and Zapotecs, other neighboring cultures preserved their history and theology principally through the spoken word, passed from generation to generation. This was true even of highly sophisticated cultures such as the Aztecs, whose painted texts relied primarily on a rebus or picture form of writing incapable of recording abstract ideas phonetically. Yet the concept of oral poetry held by the Aztecs is exemplary of the view of such discourse throughout Mesoamerica, including the Maya. For the ancient Aztecs the highest form of sacred communication was poetry, what they called xochicuicatl (“flower-song”). These were delicately beautiful hymns meant to be recited orally, often to musical accompaniment. In paintings, Aztec poets are depicted with speech scrolls issuing from their mouths. These scrolls are often colored a rich blue or green, symbolic of the precious nature of the poets’ words as if they were composed of jade or sacred quetzal feathers. Aztecs looked upon poetry as the actualization of a creative act inspired by divinites who were called upon to be present at the performance. Thus the poet Ayocuan Cuetzpaltzin of Tecamachalco believed that his songs came from heaven, but lamented that his own words could not express them as they came undefiled from the gods: From within the heavens they come, The beautiful flowers, the beautiful songs. Our longing spoils them, Our inventiveness makes them lose their fragrance. (León-Portilla 1980, 257) Such songs exist only at the moment of their performance, their sound hanging briefly in the air, then fading to silence. It is only when they are spoken that they reveal their divine origin, transforming the poet into a messenger of deity: Now I am going to forge songs, Make a stem flowering with songs, Oh my friends! God has sent me as a messenger. I am transformed into a poem. (León-Portilla 1969, 80) Most poems were learned by heart and were lost forever if forgotten. Thus Aztec poetry had no permanent reality of its own, no more than a dream. It is only by an accident of history that we know of them at all. Soon after the Spanish conquest of the Aztec empire in 1521, a few Spanish missionaries such as Fr. Andrés de Olmos and Fr. Bernardino de Sahagún attempted to preserve long transcriptions of ancient Aztec history, theology, and poetry utilizing the Latin script. Olmos and Sahagún relied for these accounts on elderly members of the Aztec nobility who had memorized them in their youth. Unfortunately these invaluable books were vigorously suppressed soon after their completion for fear that the Indians would learn of them and use them as an excuse to revert to their former paganism. Sahagún himself faced censure in 1577 for his work during the reign of King Philip II, who ordered his representative in Mexico to gather all copies of Sahagún’s transcriptions of Aztec texts and secrete them away: It seems that it is not proper that this book be published or disseminated in those places.... We thus command that, upon receiving this Cedula, you obtain these books with great care and diligence; that you make sure that no original or copy of them is left there; and that you have them sent in good hands at the first opportunity to our Council of Indies in order that they may be examined there. And you are warned absolutely not to allow any person to write concerning the superstitions and ways of life of these Indians in any language, for this is not proper to God’s service and to ours. (León-Portilla 1980, 38) The Spanish authorities realized that preserving a record of the literary heritage of the Aztecs constituted an intolerable danger to their own political and religious domination of the region. By suppressing cultural memory, missionaries could more effectively extirpate it from the life of the people they sought to convert to Christianity. The suppression of indigenous culture was far more difficult among the Maya who did not have to rely on the spoken word to preserve their literary heritage. More than fifteen hundred years prior to the Spanish conquest, the Maya developed a sophisticated hieroglyphic script capable of recording complex literary compositions, both on folded screen codices made of bark paper as well as texts incised on more durable stone or wood. The importance of preserving written records was a hallmark of Maya culture as witnessed by the thousands of known hieroglyphic inscriptions, many more of which are still being discovered in the jungles of southern Mexico and northern Central America. Being a phonetic script rather than a pictorial form of writing, Maya hieroglyphs were capable of recording any idea that could be spoken. Ancient Maya scribes were among the most honored members of creative society. They were often important representatives of the royal family, and as such were believed to carry the seeds of divinity within their blood. Among the titles given to artists and scribes in Classic period Maya inscriptions were itz’aat (“sage”) and miyaatz (“wise one”). In an important royal tomb at Tikal (Burial 116), an incised bone depicts a deified scribe’s hand emerging from the gullet of an open-mouthed creature. In Classic Maya art, the open jaws represent a portal that leads from this world to the world of the gods. In his or her hand is a calligraphic paintbrush used to both write and illustrate the ancient Maya codex books. The message of this incised bone is that the activities of the scribe come closest to those of the gods themselves, who paint the realities of this world as divine artists. The Spanish conquest of the Maya region in the sixteenth century resulted in the abrupt destruction of indigenous political power as well as many of its cultural institutions. Christianity was formally established in Guatemala in 1534 under Bishop Francisco Marroquín, who sent out priests with portable altars to the various highland Maya towns and villages in an effort to baptize the indigenous population and to destroy any remnants of “idolatry” that they might find. Ancient temples, as well as the carved and painted images which they contained, were systematically destroyed, their stones used to build Christian churches. Missionaries singled out hieroglyphic codices for destruction in an effort to protect the Indians from their former religious beliefs. Alonso de Zorita wrote that in 1540 he saw numerous such books in the Guatemalan highlands which “recorded their history for more than eight hundred years back, and which were interpreted for me by very ancient Indians” (Zorita 1963, 271-2). Fr. Bartolomé de las Casas lamented that when found, such books were destroyed: These books were seen by our clergy, and even I saw part of those which were burned by the monks, apparently because they thought [they] might harm the Indians in matters concerning religion, since at that time they were at the beginning of their conversion. (Las Casas 1958, 346) One of the most zealous of these early missionaries was Fr. Diego de Landa who burned hundreds of ancient Maya books while serving as the bishop at Maní in northern Yucatán: We found a large number of books of these characters, and as they contained nothing in which there were not to be seen superstition and lies of the devil, we burned them all, which they regretted to an amazing degree and which caused them much affliction. (Landa 1941, 78) Of the numerous hieroglyphic books that once existed in the Maya lowlands, all that escaped the Spanish purges of the sixteenth century are four incomplete codices. Of those written in the highlands of Guatemala, not a single Precolumbian codex is known to have survived. But these tragic acts of destruction did not mean that Maya literacy ended with the arrival of the Europeans. Soon after the Spanish conquest, literate members of the highland Maya nobility made a number of transcriptions of their Precolumbian books utilizing a modified Latin script in an effort to preserve what they could of their recorded history and culture before they could be destroyed or lost. By far the most important extant example of such a transcription is the Popol Vuh, a lengthy document composed by anonymous members of the Quiché-Maya aristocracy in Guatemala soon after the fall of their capital city to the Spanish conquerors. The authors of the manuscript described the text as an ilb'al (instrument of sight) by which the reader may “envision” the thoughts and actions of the gods and sacred ancestors from the beginning of time and into the future. The opening chapters of the Popol Vuh describe the creation of all things as if it were occuring in the immediate present, time folding back upon itself to transport the reader into the primordial waters of chaos at the very moment the first land emerged: THIS IS THE ACCOUNT of when all is still silent and placid. All is silent and calm. Hushed and empty is the womb of the sky.... The face of the earth has not yet appeared. Alone lies the expanse of the sea, along with the womb of all the sky. There is not yet anything gathered together. All is at rest. Nothing stirs. (Popol Vuh, p. 67) This passage is written in present progressive tense, suggesting that the narrator sees it before him as he writes. This is consistent with the way stories are told in contemporary Quiché households. The storyteller invites the listener to imagine the setting of his tale, and nearly always tells the story as if it were happening right then, even if it happened in the distant or mythic past. The text of the Popol Vuh was kept hidden by indigenous elders for centuries in the town of Chichicastenango in Guatemala. So successful were these efforts to preserve early Colonial texts that two hundred years after the Conquest, a Spanish priest living in Chichicastenango named Francisco Ximénez wrote that the people of that town possessed many ancient books, including the manuscript of the Popol Vuh. Ximénez wrote that these books were kept in secret so that local Christian authorities would not learn of them. Far from being forgotten tales, he found that these texts were “the doctrine which they first imbibed with their mother’s milk, and that all of them knew it almost by heart” (Ximénez 1929-31, I.i.5). Ximénez was able to convince the elders who kept the Popol Vuh manuscript to allow him to borrow it for the purpose of making a copy. After Ximénez made his copy, the original text was presumably given back to the Maya although it has not been seen since the early 1700s. Today we, in the Western world, know of this great book only through Ximénez’s transcription, which has become one of the principal resources used by European and American scholars who study Maya history and theology. It is unfortunate, however, that the great majority of Maya people have not had access to it for centuries in their own language. Literacy has slowly eroded away among the contemporary Maya such that few are literate in their native tongue. The sacred records of the Maya were forcibly taken from them and destroyed in the fires of the Spanish conquest. It is only in the past hundred years or so that fragments of what they have lost are beginning to be rediscovered and read widely. For the Maya each ancient word, whether read or spoken aloud, is life-giving in its power to reach across the centuries. The Maya people can understand the preciousness of such documents in ways that we who have never been denied literacy can hardly imagine. In preparing this translation of the Popol Vuh, I often remembered that evening near Chihul when I had the opportunity to read passages from this great book to its authors’ descendents. The words were meant for them, not me. In translating the text, I have tried to bear in mind that this process gives voice to the ancients so that their words may be heard again. It is my sincerest hope that I have been faithful to their voices. This work is published in two volumes. The first consists of an English translation of the Popol Vuh with commentary aimed at elucidating the meaning of the text in light of contemporary highland Maya speech and practices, as well as current scholarship in Maya linguistics, archaeology, ethnography, and art historical iconography. No text can be translated from one language into another without losing a certain amount of the beauty and nuance of the original. The poet Stéphane Mallarmé felt that his poetry should never be translated because the symbolism, flow, and sound of the words were so closely bound to the French language. To convey even a portion of the associated meaning that colored his poems would require extensive explanatory notes, and for Mallarmé “to name an object is to suppress three-quarters of the enjoyment to be found in the poem, which consists in the pleasure of discovering things little by little: suggestion, that is the dream” (Lucie-Smith 1972, 54). To a great extent, this is also true of the language found in the Popol Vuh, which is replete with esoteric language, plays on words, and phrases chosen for their sound and rhythm as much as for their meaning. I’ve tried to adhere as closely as possible to the tone and syntax of the Quiché text, however, certain liberties are unavoidable in order to make the narrative understandable in the English language. For example, the Quiché language stresses passive verb constructions, which when translated into European languages are difficult to follow. The authors of the Popol Vuh also routinely used passive forms to create gerunds that are hopelessly awkward in English. Thus, the words “manifestation, declaration, and expression” in lines 11-13 are actually written, “its being manifested, its being declared, its being expressed.” To partially compensate for the inadequacy of a grammatic English version to adhere precisely to the wording of the original, the second volume of this work contains a “literal” word for word translation of the text. I have chosen to use this arrangement because I believe that language is reflective of the flavor of the culture that utilizes it. When the original phraseology and grammatical construction of the ancient text is preserved, subtle nuances of meaning become evident. The first line of the Popol Vuh declares the book to be u xe' ojer tzij, which may be translated literally as “its root ancient word.” The phrase indicates that this is the beginning of the ancient history of the Quiché people. The remainder of the book is thus seen as growing like a plant from this “root.” The imagery is a beautiful expression of the Quiché world view as an agricultural society. One of my hopes for this project was to make the original Quiché text of the Popol Vuh available to the Quiché people themselves in a form that is consistent with the modern script taught in the Guatemalan school system. I have therefore utilized in the literal translation an entirely new transcription of the original Quiché text using modern orthography. I have also included a transcription of the Latin orthographic version of the Popol Vuh as it was written by its Quiché authors in the sixteenth century for comparative purposes. The Popol Vuh is the most important example of Precolumbian Maya literature to have survived the Spanish conquest. Its significance may be seen in the numerous versions of the text that have been published. In the past three hundred years, the Popol Vuh has been translated approximately thirty times into seven languages. Unfortunately most of these translations were not based on the original Quiché-Maya text, but rather on various Spanish versions derived from it. The translation contained in this book is entirely new, based primarily on my own knowledge of the language, as well as dictionaries and grammars compiled in the last century by García Elgueta (1892, ca. 1900, ca. 1910), Sáenz de Santa María (1940), León (1954), Edmonson (1965), Alvarado López (1975), Mondloch and Hruska (1975), Siméon (1977), García Hernández and Yac Sam (1980), Ajpacaja Tum, Chox Tum, Tepaz Raxuleu and Guarchaj Ajtzalam (1996), López Ixcoy (1997), Pérez Mendoza and Hernández Mendoza (2000), and Par Sapón and Can Pixabaj (2000). I have also relied on consultations with native Quiché speakers in the highland Guatemalan towns of Momostenango (and the surrounding aldeas of Santa Ana, Canquixaja, Nimsitu, and Panca), Totonicapán (and its aldeas of Nimasak, Chuxchimal, and Cerro de Oro), Nahuala, Cunen (and its aldeas of Los Trigales, Xesacmalha, Xetzak, Las Grutas, Chitu, and Xepom), and Chihul. It is fortunate in this regard that the Quiché language has changed surprisingly little in the centuries since the Popol Vuh was composed. With important exceptions, most of the vocabulary is still understandable to modern Quichés. For terms and phrases associated with Maya religion and ritual, I have also worked with a number of Quiché aj q'ijab', who continue to conduct traditional calendric and divinatory rites in a manner little different from that practiced at the time the Popol Vuh was compiled. I am particularly indebted to don Vicente de León Abac of Momostenango for his wisdom and patience with me in this regard. For archaic and non-Maya loan words which are no longer used by modern Quichés, I have relied on dictionaries, grammars, and theological treatises prepared by Spanish priests in the early Colonial period, principally those compiled by Fr. Domingo de Vico (ca. 1555), Bishop Francisco Marroquín (ca. 1560), Fr. Alonso de Molina (1571), Fr. Marcos Martínez (ca. 1575), Fr. Antonio de Ciudad Real (ca. 1590), Fr. Thomás de Coto (ca. 1656), Fr. Bartolomé de Anléo (ca. 1660), Fr. Tomás de Santo Domingo (ca. 1690), Fr. Benito de Villacañas (1692), Fr. Domingo de Basseta (ca. 1698), Fr. Francisco de Vare[l]a (1699), Fr. Francisco Ximénez (ca. 1701-4), Fr. Pantaleón de Guzmán (1704), Fr. Damián Delgado (1725), Fr. Francisco Herrera (1745), and Fr. Angel (ca. 1775). Translation is an art whose cloth is woven from a variety of threads. Any defects are solely the fault of the weaver. Its beauty is solely dependent on the threads themselves. Allen J. Christenson Provo, December 27, 2002 INTRODUCTION Quiché History: The Popol Vuh was written by anonymous members of the Quiché-Maya nobility, a branch of the Maya that dominated the highlands of western Guatemala prior to the arrival of Spanish conquerors in 1524. Their present population is something over half a million, spread thinly through a series of market towns and smaller agricultural villages in the modern Guatemalan states of Quiché, Totonicapán, and Quetzaltenango. Their homeland is some of the most beautiful country in the world, dominated by a range of high mountains, volcanoes, and steep-walled plateaus, wrapped in green pine forest, and watered by numerous rivers and waterfalls. Its high elevation keeps the climate comfortably cool in the summer, while its location in the tropics prevents the extreme cold temperatures usually associated with mountainous environments. Guatemala’s boast of being the “Land of Eternal Spring” is no exaggeration. Although the highland Maya have lived in this area for more than two thousand years, the Popol Vuh suggests that they came to be dominated by a militaristic group of relative newcomers, led by the Cavec-Quiché lineage, who claimed to have come from somewhere in the East where the sun rises (Popol Vuh, pp. 204-205), likely the Maya lowlands during the early Postclassic phase (ca. AD 900-1200). During this period of history, many of the most important Maya ruling lineages throughout the region were multilingual and heavily influenced by ideas from beyond their borders, particularly from Nahua speakers, the language of central Mexico. According to Bernardino de Sahagún, a Spanish priest who worked among the Aztecs soon after the Spanish conquest, the lowland Maya area was known as Nonoualcat (land of the dumb) because it was occupied by non-Nahua speakers, although he asserted that many could speak Nahua as a second language (Sahagún 1959-63, Book X, 170; cf. Carmack 1981, 46). Nahua, the language of the Toltecs and later Aztecs, had become a kind of lingua franca among elite groups throughout Mesoamerica by the last centuries prior to the Spanish conquest. The highland Maya in particular remembered the legendary Toltecs, the ruling class of central Mexico in the early Postclassic period, as the greatest of artists and sages (Popol Vuh, p. 80n.102) and adopted many Nahua words that reflect political as well as esoteric ceremonial concepts. In the Terminal Classic (AD 800-900) and Early Postclassic (AD 900-1200) phases, central Mexican influence spread rapidly through much of Mesoamerica (Thompson 1970, 18-21; Fox 1978, 274). The most impressive center of Mexican influence in the Maya world during this time was Chichen Itza, located in the northern region of the Yucatán Peninsula. Diego de Landa, one of the first Spanish priests to work among the Maya of Yucatán, was told that the city was visited by a non-Maya priest-ruler who came from across the Gulf of Mexico named Kukulcan (Yucatec: “Feathered Serpent”). This legend dovetails well with similar myths recorded in Aztec sources concerning the Toltec priest-ruler Topiltzin Quetzalcoatl who sailed across the Gulf of Mexico toward Yucatán at approximately the same time (ca. AD 978 according to Aztec chronicles) (Landa 1941, 20-23; Coe 1987, 132). Yet central Mexican influences at Chichen Itza are much older than this legendary visit by Kukulcan. The supposedly Toltec-inspired Great Ballcourt at Chichen was dedicated on a date corresponding to November 18, 864, and current archaeological evidence indicates that all of the principal buildings of the city were completed well-before AD 1000 (Schele and Mathews 1998, 200). Rather than the result of a single event, such as the arrival of Kukulcan, central Mexican influence in the Maya world should be seen as a long continuum of mutual interaction extending back to at least the third or fourth century with the arrival of merchants and perhaps military invaders from the great central Mexican city of Teotihuacan. There is clear evidence of the presence of armed warriors from Teotihuacan who arrived at the largest of lowland Maya centers, Tikal, in AD 378. There the foreigners oversaw the establishment of a new dynasty of heavily Mexican-influenced rulers, if not Teotihuacanos themselves (Martin and Grube 2000, 29-36). That this was no isolated event is attested by the presence at about the same time of Teotihuacan architectural, ceramic, and artistic influences throughout the Maya world, particularly in the Guatemalan highlands centered at the major site of Kaminaljuyu (Kidder, Jennings, and Shook 1946; Sanders 1977; Michels 1979; Hatch 1997) and in the Tiquisate area (Hellmuth 1975, 1987; Bove 1989). Despite these influences from central Mexico, Tikal and its neighbors maintained their fundamentally Maya character and within a brief time reestablished their own native dynasties. Chichen Itza as well, notwithstanding its taste for central Mexican motifs and concepts, was also likely ruled by native Maya lineages. Their claims to “Toltec” ancestry were part of the political climate of the age where such legendary Mexican connections were essential to establishing legitimacy based on ancient precedent. Schele and Mathews suggest that the Itza-Maya rulers of Chichen Itza used central Mexican imagery as a means of proclaiming themselves the legitimate inheritors of Toltec power in the same way that kings throughout Europe declared themselves to be successors to the Holy Roman Empire, regardless of their familial and social histories (Schele and Mathews 1998, 201). Indeed the Cavec Quiché lineage that produced the Popol Vuh likely had Itza-Maya connections (Akkeren 2000). Chichen Itza dominated the Yucatán peninsula and southern Gulf Coast regions, establishing a tradition of Toltec-inspired power and spiritual mystique that persisted long after Toltec rule, centered at Tula Hidalgo, collapsed in approximately the twelfth century. By the time of the Spanish conquest nearly all Maya rulers prided themselves on their Nahua/Toltec heritage (Morley, Brainerd and Sharer 1983, 166). The ruling lineages of highland Guatemala were no exception. The Popol Vuh claims that the divine creators who formed the first ancestors of the Quichés were Aj Toltecat (Toltecs) (p. 80n.102; line 568). The text also emphasizes that the Quichés were “brothers” with the Yaqui (a general term for Nahua speakers) of Mexico and that the Quichés’ principal god, Tohil, was in fact equivalent to the Mexican god Quetzalcoatl (Nahua: “Feathered Serpent”) (p. 231). This affinity for foreign Mexican culture helps to explain the many Nahua loan words in the Popol Vuh (Campbell 1970, 8; Carmack 1983, 17-18). According to the Popol Vuh, the founders of the various Quichean lineages traveled a great distance eastward “across the sea” to an epi-Toltec city called Tulan Zuyva where they received their titular gods and tokens of kingship (pp. 209-212, 256-259). Tulan is a Nahua word meaning “place of reeds,” or more broadly “city,” in the sense that it is filled with a great multitude of people as reeds crowd the shores of a lake or river. Many major Toltec.influenced ceremonial and administrative centers were therefore called Tulan. As a result, it is difficult to identify precisely which Tulan the Quiché progenitors saw as the origin of their power, although it was likely located somewhere on the Yucatán Peninsula (Carmack 1981, 48; Akkeren 2003). Chichen Itza, or its successor Mayapan, are good possibilities for this Tulan. Carmack suggests that the founders of the Quiché ruling lineages arrived in Guatemala about the time of Chichen Itza’s collapse, which Yucatec Maya histories date around AD 1221. More recent archaeological evidence suggests that this date should be pushed back significantly in time, and that, in any case, the ultimate downfall of the city was preceded by a long period of decline after the tenth century (Morley, Brainerd, and Sharer 1983, 167; Schele and Mathews 1998, 197-255; Akkeren 2000, 314-315). Chichen Itza had been the dominant force in the lowland Maya world. Its collapse disrupted the traditional politics and interregional trade of the region, resulting in the displacement of numerous groups of people seeking new power bases and economic opportunities (Fox 1978, 2). Many of these groups claimed authority based on the old Mexican-influenced symbols of power and prestige (Roys 1967, 88-98; Schele and Mathews 1998). It is possible that elements of what would become the ruling Cavec-Quiché lineage and related highland Maya progenitors were part of this human wave. Thus, at Tulan, the founding lineages of the various highland Maya kingdoms were given their titular gods, as well as tokens of “Toltec” rule (many of which bore Nahua language names) and commissioned to leave in search of places to conquer (pp. 213, 257-260). Numerous highland Maya documents speak of this pilgrimage to Tulan as a means of securing tokens of power and legitimacy. This account is from the Annals of the Cakchiquels: Then we arrived at Tulan in the darkness and in the night. Then we gave the tribute, when the seven tribes and the warriors carried the tribute. We took our places in order at the left part of Tulan.... And after the seven tribes had arrived, we the warriors came. So they said. And commanding us to come, they said to us, our mothers, and our fathers: “Go, my daughters, my sons. I will give you your wealth, your domain; I will give you your power and your majesty, your canopy and your throne. Thus shall they pay tribute to you.... Truly, your glory shall be great. You shall not be disparaged. You shall become great with the wealth of the wooden shields. Do not sleep and you shall conquer, my daughters, my sons! I will give your domain to you, the thirteen chiefs, to all of you equally: your bows, your shields, your domain, your majesty, your greatness, your canopy, and your throne. These are your first treasures.” Thus they spoke to the Quichés when the thirteen groups of warriors arrived at Tulan. (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 50) The authors of the Popol Vuh wrote that their brethren scattered in many different directions after departing from Tulan (pp. 230-232). Indeed, the Quichés described their ancestors more as refugees than as well-prepared and organized military colonists: This is what preoccupied their hearts as they passed through their great afflictions. They did not have food or sustenance. They would only sniff the bottoms of their staffs to feel as if they were eating. But they did not eat when they came. (p. 221) As outlined in the text, the Quiché forefathers were gradually able to dominate most of western Guatemala and set up their own militaristic kingdom which ultimately extended from the Pacific Coast in the west to the borders of the Petén rain forest in the east. The Quichés soon adopted the language and traditions of the more numerous highland Maya inhabitants of the places they conquered, retaining only a few lowland Maya and Nahua words which had no local equivalent, particularly those related to military, political, and theological concepts. The Popol Vuh account of a simultaneous mass migration of all the major Quichean lineage groups into the Guatemalan highlands should not be taken literally. Rather, this was more likely a slow process carried out over a period of several centuries involving a complex series of historical and social interactions (Carmack 1981, 43-74). Indeed, many of these lineages had always lived in the highlands, although their authority to exercise military or political authority may have been obtained from outside centers of power. The confederation of people known as the Quiché was more likely a complex and linguistically diverse group of lineages composed of native highland Maya, Mexicanized clans from nearby Pacific Coastal areas, and immigrants (particularly the Cavec) from the Maya lowlands (Akkeren 2000). The interrelationship between these groups was dynamic and changed significantly over time. The Popol Vuh does not contain what we would call “objective history.” It is instead a collection of traditions, partly based in historical fact and partly based on mythic interpretation, to describe the rise to power of their own ancestral lineages, specifically that of the Cavec who came to dominate the highland Maya region in the fifteenth century. This mixture of highland Maya, lowland Maya, and Mexican-influenced cultures ultimately gave birth to the traditions contained in the Popol Vuh. The arrival of the Spaniards in the early sixteenth century resulted in the abrupt disruption of Quiché-Maya rule. Hernán Cortés, conqueror of the Aztec empire in Mexico, heard reports of rich lands to be had southward in Guatemala. He therefore sent one of his captains, Pedro de Alvarado, to subdue any resistance in that direction and claim the area for the Spanish Crown. In his first letter to Cortés, Alvarado described Guatemala as “the wildest land and people that has ever been seen.... We are so far from help that if Our Lady does not aid us, no one can” (Alvarado 1979, 105). Following a brief, yet bloody campaign, Alvarado entered the Quiché capital at Cumarcah (also known by its Nahua name, Utatlan) without resistance on March 7, 1524, at the invitation of the lords Oxib Quieh and Beleheb Tzi. Once inside the city, Alvarado suspected a trap and ordered the arrest and execution of its rulers: As I knew them [the Quiché lords] to have such ill will toward the service of His Majesty, and for the good and tranquility of the land, I burned them, and I commanded to be burned the town of Utatlan to its foundations, for it was dangerous and strong.... All they that were taken prisoners of war were branded and made slaves. (Alvarado 1979, 102-3) During the early Spanish Colonial period, the population of Guatemala declined by as much as 85% as a result of war, forced labor, and disease. Fortunately, President Alonso López Cerrato, the successor to Pedro de Alvarado, was more tolerant: During this year [1549] the Lord President Cerrado arrived.... When he arrived, he condemned the Spaniards, he liberated the slaves and vassals of the Spaniards, he cut the taxes in two, he suspended forced labor and made the Spaniards pay all men, great and small. The lord Cerrado truly alleviated the sufferings of the people. I myself saw him, oh, my sons! (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 137) Christianity was formally established in Guatemala in 1534 under Bishop Francisco Marroquín, who sent out priests with portable altars to the various Indian towns and villages to baptize the Maya and destroy any remnants of “idolatry” and “paganism” which might have survived the Conquest. To aid in the process of conversion, missionary priests gathered the Maya into towns, each with a church to administer Catholic rites and instruct them in the Christian faith. Because Cumarcah had been all but destroyed during the war, the remnants of its population were moved to a new settlement nearby in ca. 1555, which the Spanish authorities called Santa Cruz del Quiché (Holy Cross of the Quiché). It was likely here that the Popol Vuh was compiled in the form that we have today. Precolumbian Popol Vuh: In the preamble to the Popol Vuh, its Quiché authors wrote that the contents were based on an ancient book from across the sea (p. 64). In a later passage, the source of these writings is identified as Tulan, which they located across the sea to the east (p. 259), apparently a reference to the Maya lowlands of the Yucatán Peninsula. The Quiché lords held these “writings of Tulan” in great reverence and consulted them often (p. 287). The Maya lowlands had a tradition of literacy dating back to at least AD 200, centered on a sophisticated hieroglyphic script. If the Precolumbian version of the Popol Vuh was like other ancient texts from the lowlands, it was painted on long strips of bark paper or deer skin which were given a thin coating of lime plaster to create a smooth writing surface, and then folded accordian style into a codex book. A number of such ancient painted codices were seen by the first Spanish missionaries and administrators who arrived in Guatemala. Bartolomé de las Casas saw several hieroglyphic books about 1540. He wrote that they contained the history of the people’s origins and religious beliefs, written with “figures and characters by which they could signify everything they desired; and that these great books are of such astuteness and subtle technique that we could say our writing does not offer much of an advantage” (Las Casas 1958, 346). Las Casas was particularly impressed by the fact that the Maya could write “everything they desired.” The Maya were, in fact, the only people in the New World who had a writing system at the time of the Spanish conquest which had this capability. Maya hieroglyphs are partly phonetic (glyphs which stand for individual sounds) and partly logographic (picture writing in which a glyph stands for an entire word or concept). Because of their phonetic nature, Maya glyphs may be placed together to form any word which can be thought or spoken. There is no evidence that such a script was ever developed or used in the Guatemalan highlands after the Late Preclassic, however, the authors of the Popol Vuh made clear that they based their writings on an imported text from the Maya lowlands. It is likely that some few scribes at the Quiché court were familiar enough with such books in their possession that they could read them in at least a cursory way. Beginning in March 1555, a judge from the province of Mexico named Alonso de Zorita began a tour of inspection through the province of Guatemala in order to moderate tribute levies and correct administrative abuses inflicted on the local Maya population. As part of his duties, Zorita visited the ancient city of Utatlan to learn what he could about the ancient political system of the Quichés. There he was shown “paintings that they had which recorded their history for more than eight hundred years back, and which were interpreted for me by very ancient Indians” (Zorita 1963, 271-2). There must have been hundreds of hieroglyphic books in the Maya world at the time of the Spanish conquest. It is one of the great tragedies of New World history that the vast majority of these were destroyed. Las Casas witnessed the destruction of a number of such books which were burned to “protect” the Maya from their traditional religion: These books were seen by our clergy, and even I saw part of those which were burned by the monks, apparently because they thought [they] might harm the Indians in matters concerning religion, since at that time they were at the beginning of their conversion. (Las Casas 1958, 346) Diego de Landa was particularly zealous in his efforts to destroy any hieroglyphic books which he could find in northern Yucatán: “We found a large number of books of these characters and, as they contained nothing in which there were not to be seen superstition and lies of the devil, we burned them all, which they regretted to an amazing degree and which caused them much affliction” (Landa 1941, 78). Only four lowland Maya codices are known to have escaped these purges. We can only add our own laments to those of the Maya over the irretrievable loss of a people’s literary heritage. Of the many hieroglyphic books that once existed in the highlands, including the Precolumbian version of the Popol Vuh, not a single one is known to have survived. The fact that the contents of the original Popol Vuh predated the Spanish conquest gave them an aura of mystery and power. Its authors referred to the ancient book upon which the Popol Vuh was based as an ilb'al, meaning “instrument of sight or vision” (p. 64; lines 51.52). The word is used today to refer to the clear quartz crystals that Quiché priests use in divinatory ceremonies. It may also be used to refer to magnifying glasses or spectacles, by which things may be seen more clearly. Thus the rulers of the Quichés consulted the Popol Vuh in times of national distress as a means of seeing the future: They knew if there would be war. It was clear before their faces. They saw if there would be death, if there would be hunger. They surely knew if there would be strife. There was an instrument of sight. There was a book. Popol Vuh was their name for it. (p. 287) Ancient Maya books were periodically displayed on state occasions as an assertion of legitimacy by the rulers who possessed them (Carmack 1973, 17-18). Diego de Landa wrote that “the most important possession that the nobles who abandoned Mayapan took away to their own country was the books of their sciences” (Landa 1941, 39). Even today the possession of old books and manuscripts is highly prestigious among the highland Maya. La Farge and Byers observed that the titles and papers of the community of Todos Santos were kept in a chest which “is highly revered, if not worshiped, by the Indians, and is carried in a solemn procession on New Year’s day, when the new officials take office” (La Farge and Byers 1931, 14). The Precolumbian version of the Popol Vuh has unfortunately been lost. Even the authors of the sixteenth century manuscript copy wrote that the more ancient book could no longer be seen in their day, and that what they compiled was based on the original (p. 64). It should not be assumed that this was a word for word transcription, however. The few Precolumbian Maya codices that survive, as well as the numerous inscriptions found on stelae, altars, architectural wall panels, etc., all bear texts that are highly formalized and condensed references to dates, persons, and events that briefly outline the stories they wish to tell. These are often accompanied by illustrations to further elucidate the otherwise terse prose. No known Precolumbian text contains the kind of long storytelling devices, descriptive detail, commentary, and extensive passages of dialogue found in the Popol Vuh. It is more likely to have been a compilation of oral traditions based to one degree or another on mythic and historical details outlined in a Precolumbian codex with their associated painted illustrations. Authors of the Popol Vuh: The authors of the Popol Vuh were anonymous. In the text they refer to themselves only as “we” (p. 64), indicating that there were more than one who contributed to its compilation. The anonymity of the authors is unusual since most Colonial period highland Maya documents were prepared for some official purpose, and were duly signed by their authors as testimony of their veracity. For whatever reason, those who were responsible for compiling the Popol Vuh did not wish their identities to be known. The authors were traditionalists, in the sense that they recorded the history and theology of the ancient highland Maya people without adding material from European sources. The Popol Vuh thus contains very little direct Christian influence. By its own account it is a faithful record of the contents of the ancient Popol Vuh text which could no longer be seen (p. 64). Although the traditions of the book were compiled after the Conquest, “under the law of God and Christianity” (ibid.), its Quiché authors venerated their traditional Maya gods as luminous, wise beings who brought life and light to the world through their creative works. The statement that the Popol Vuh was composed within Christianity immediately follows a declaration that the Maya gods “accomplished their purpose in purity of being and in truth” long before the arrival of the Christian God (p. 63). Thus the Popol Vuh contrasts its “ancient word” (pp. 59, 64) which contains light and life, with that of the more recent voice of Christianity. In highland Maya society, antiquity denotes authority. A modern priest-shaman in Momostenango once told me that the Maya “Earth God” is greater than Christ and the saints because he was worshiped by his people for centuries before the arrival of the Europeans. Such unapologetic reverence for the ancient gods would have been offensive to the Spanish missionaries. During the early decades of the Spanish conquest, the most obvious expressions of Maya religion and literature were either destroyed or forced into hiding. Old hieroglyphic books were singled out as dangerous hindrances to the conversion of the people and were actively sought out and destroyed. Those who were found in possession of such books were persecuted and even killed. As much as two hundred years later, Ximénez wrote that many ancient books were still kept in secret by the Quichés so that the Spanish authorities would not learn of them (Ximénez 1929-31, I.i.5). It was the loss of such precious books as the hieroglyphic Popol Vuh which may have prompted Quiché scribes to preserve what they could of their literature by transcribing their contents into a form which would make them safer from the fiery purges of Christian authorities. The authors of the Popol Vuh may have recognized the danger in this and cloaked themselves with anonymity to protect themselves. The preamble to the Popol Vuh may hint at this when it declares that “the original book exists that was written anciently, but its witnesses and those who ponder it hide their faces” (p. 64). It is therefore he who “witnesses and ponders” the ancient book who is in hiding, perhaps an indirect reference to the authors of the Popol Vuh manuscript who did not wish their identities known for fear that the authorities might do harm to them or the book in their possession. The Popol Vuh was likely composed in its present form at Santa Cruz del Quiché, a new city founded by the Spanish conquerors near the ruins of Cumarcah/Utatlan, the ancient capital of the Quichés. The majority of its inhabitants were members of the old ruling classes which had been resettled from Cumarcah to aid in their conversion to Christianity and to more easily supervise their activities. The authors of the text were most likely members of the Quiché nobility who may have retained some Precolumbian manuscripts from the royal archives that survived the Conquest. The Popol Vuh does provide some clues as to who its authors may have been. In an extended passage placed immediately after the dynastic list of the Quiché kings themselves, the text declares that the three Nim Ch'okoj (Great Stewards) of the principal Quiché ruling lineages were “the mothers of the word, and the fathers of the word” (p. 305). “The word” is used in the text to describe the Popol Vuh itself (p. 59; lines 1-4), indicating that the Nim Ch'okoj were likely the authors of the book. Nim Ch'okoj was a relatively minor position within the Quiché nobility, charged with certain duties at royal banquets, perhaps including the recitation of tales dealing with the gods, heroes and past rulers of the Quiché nation. The Popol Vuh lists don Juan de Rojas and don Juan Cortés as the contemporary Quiché kings of the ruling Cavec lineage when the manuscript was written (p. 297). These men were grandsons of the two kings burned by Pedro de Alvarado during the conquest of the Quiché nation. If the authors of the Popol Vuh were the three Nim Ch'okoj of the major Quiché lineages in the days of Juan de Rojas and Juan Cortés, then at least one of their names is known. The contemporary Título Totonicapán was completed during the reign of these same two kings. One of the signatories of the document was Adon Cristóbal Velasco, Nim Chocoh Cavec” (Great Steward of the Cavec) (Chonay and Goetz 1953, 195; Carmack and Mondloch 1983, 200). Thus don Cristóbal Velasco was likely one of the elusive authors of the Popol Vuh as well. Whoever they may have been, the authors of the Popol Vuh manuscript were trained in the use of European letters. Soon after the formal establishment of Christianity in highland Guatemala, Christian missionaries began to teach representatives of the various Maya lineages of Guatemala to read and write their languages using a modified Latin script developed by Fr. Francisco de la Parra. The first bishop of Guatemala, Francisco Marroquín strongly advocated this policy as a means of aiding the conversion effort to Christianity. The authors of the Popol Vuh undoubtedly learned to read and write with the Latin alphabet under the direction of Christian missionaries who were actively establishing schools for this purpose in major Maya towns, undoubtedly including Santa Cruz del Quiché. History of the Popol Vuh Manuscript: Although the Popol Vuh is undated, internal evidence points to the work being completed between the years 1554 and 1558. The manuscript mentions that Juan de Rojas and Juan Cortés, grandsons of the kings burned by Alvarado during the Conquest, were alive and recognized as rulers when the Popol Vuh was written. The signatures of these kings appear on the last page of the Título Totonicapán, which is dated September 28, 1554 (Chonay and Goetz 1953, 194-5). The Popol Vuh must have been written prior to 1558, because by that date don Juan de Rojas had disappeared from Colonial records and had presumably died. Thus the Royal Title of Don Francisco Izquin Nehaib, dated November 22, 1558, is signed by Don Juan Cortés and Don Martín, kings of the Quiché at Santa Cruz (Recinos 1957, 115). The Popol Vuh also refers to one don Pedro de Robles as the current “Lord Magistrate” of the Nihaib lineage (p. 301). Pedro de Robles is known to have taken office soon after 1554, therefore the Popol Vuh must have been written sometime between the years 1554 and 1558. This decade was one of great impoverishment in the town of Santa Cruz del Quiché. Despite a dramatic decline in population in the area following the Conquest, Spanish officials continued to drain its resources with heavy tribute levies and extortion. This became particularly severe with the accession of the Spanish king Philip II in 1556. The new king was desperate to augment royal revenues by any means possible to alleviate Spain’s acute financial difficulties. As a result, the Crown sought to limit where possible the traditional tribute rights and other privileges which had been the chief means of support for the Quiché nobility, while seizing their assets (Carmack 1973, 20). Alonso de Zorita, a judge from the Audiencia of Mexico, travelled through Guatemala in 1555. While there, he visited Santa Cruz del Quiché and inquired of the native rulers concerning their government. He was amazed to find that those who were at one time “lords of Utatlan” were: as poor and miserable as the poorest Indian of the town, and their wives fixed the tortillas for dinner because they had no servants, nor any means of supporting them; they themselves carried fuel and water for their houses. The principal lord was named Don Juan de Rojas, the second, Don Juan Cortés.... They were all extremely poor; they left sons who were all penniless, miserable tribute-payers, for the Spaniards do not exempt any Indians from payment of tribute. (Zorita 1963, 272) Spanish conquerors had divided up much of the land they had seized as spoils of war in the form of an encomienda, an institution whereby the Crown authorized Spaniards who participated in the Conquest to collect tribute and demand labor from the Indians in return for services such as military duty and providing for the spiritual welfare of Indians under their control (Orellana 1983, 137). Members of the Maya nobility protested this confiscation of their property, claiming traditional rights as rulers under Colonial law. Spanish courts tended to respect land claims and tribute rights held by important noble lineages if these could be documented based on written proof of genealogy and history. Many highland Maya texts were prepared specifically as “royal titles,” and were duly signed by native rulers as legal documents. Where possible, these titles were based on Precolumbian books whose antiquity served to bolster their authenticity in court. The Quiché lord, don Juan Cortés, travelled to Spain in 1557 to directly press his case for royal privileges at the court of Philip II. This endeavor was unsuccessful as he was judged to be unworthy of special rights, being the son of an idolator. It was also suspected that he was not whole-heartedly converted to the Christian faith, and that it would require “very little to restore their ceremonies and attract their former subjects to himself” (Tedlock 1996, 56). This reflects the general mood of the Spanish authorities in Guatemala who sought to limit the rights of native rulers. The governor of Guatemala, Alonso López Cerrato, wrote to the Spanish king on May 25, 1552, that the Maya prior to the Conquest “reverenced” their rulers “as gods, and if this were to continue, the lords could raise the land in rebellion easily” (Carmack 1973, 379. Translation by author). The fate of the sixteenth century transcription of the Popol Vuh is unknown for the next 150 years. At some time during this period, it was taken from Santa Cruz del Quiché to the nearby town of Chuvila, now known as Santo Tomás Chichicastenango. Chichicastenango had long since eclipsed Santa Cruz in size and importance, and most members of the old nobility had transferred their residence there. Today it is still famed for its spectacular mountain scenery, and its preservation of traditional Quiché culture. Between 1701 and 1704, a Dominican monk named Francisco Ximénez, the parish priest of Chichicastenango, came to obtain the manuscript. Ximénez had served since 1694 in various Maya communities where he learned a number of dialects and studied Maya grammar so that he could teach it to newly-arrived clerics. He was particularly impressed with the Quiché language, calling it the “principal one of the world.” Ximénez was interested as well in the ancient traditions of the Quichés. He noted that in his parish the people still conserved ancient “errors” which they had believed prior to the arrival of the Spaniards (Ximénez 1929-31, I.i.54). His curiosity concerning ancient Quiché history and religion may have overcome the suspicion of the guardians of the Popol Vuh manuscript, who allowed him to see it and make a copy. Ximénez wrote that other such texts were also in their possession: It was with great reserve that these manuscripts were kept among them, with such secrecy, that neither the ancient ministers knew of it, and investigating this point, while I was in the parish of Santo Tomás Chichicastenango, I found that it was the doctrine which they first imbibed with their mother’s milk, and that all of them knew it almost by heart, and I found that they had many of these books among them. (Ximénez 1929-31, I.i.5) Ximénez transcribed the Quiché text of the Popol Vuh, and added a Spanish translation of its contents. It is unknown what happened to the sixteenth century manuscript, although presumably Ximénez returned it to its Quiché owners. It is possible that the original may still survive in the possession of village elders or in the town archives of Chichicastenango. Ximénez’s manuscript lay forgotten in parish archives until the Guatemalan Civil War of 1829 when all religious orders were expelled from the country. Books and papers formerly housed in convents and monasteries were subsequently transferred to public libraries, government repositories, or the collections of private individuals. Ximénez’s copy of the Popol Vuh manuscript apparently ended up in the library of the University of San Carlos in Guatemala City. An Austrian traveler named Carl Scherzer saw it there in 1854 and had a copy made to take with him back to Europe. In part, Scherzer commissioned this copy to be made due to the poor condition of the manuscript. He described it as having been “written in such light ink that the original might very well become illegible and useless in a few years” (Scherzer 1856, 9). Lamentably, this faded copy of the Ximénez transcription of the Popol Vuh has since vanished from public records. Scherzer published Ximénez’s Spanish version of the text in 1856, the first time the Popol Vuh had appeared in print. The book was greeted with a great deal of excitement in Europe and America, where interest in ancient cultures was widespread. In 1861, four years after Scherzer’s book, the Quiché version of the Popol Vuh was published for the first time, along with a rather flowery French translation by Father Charles Etienne Brasseur de Bourbourg. This publication was based on yet another copy of the Ximénez transcription which Brasseur had obtained from a Quiché man, named Ignacio Coloch, who resided in the town of Rabinal. This manuscript is of supreme importance because it is the oldest known Quiché version of the Popol Vuh text which has survived. Ximénez was in charge of the parish of Rabinal from 1704-1714, immediately following his years in Chichicastenango. It is unknown whether Ximénez prepared the “Rabinal Manuscript” during this period of his ministry or brought it with him from Chichicastenango. The Rabinal Manuscript of the Popol Vuh bears the cumbersome title, Empiezan las historias del origen de los Indios de esta provincia de Guatemala, traduzido de la lengua quiché en la castellana para más comodidad de los Ministros del Sto. Evangelio, por el R.P.F. Franzisco Ximénez, Cura doctrinero por el Real Patronato del Pueblo de Sto. Thomás Chuilá (Beginning of the histories of the origin of the Indians of this province of Guatemala, translated from the Quiché language to Spanish for the greater convenience of the Ministries of the Holy Gospel, by the Reverend Father Franzisco Ximénez, Parish Priest for the Royal Patronage of the Town of Santo Tomás Chuilá). It is handwritten in a clear, flowing cursive script arranged in two columns, Quiché on the left and Ximénez’s Spanish translation on the right. Fortunately the ink used has remained well-preserved, and the paper is in remarkably good condition with almost no lacunae due to stains, tears or holes. It was placed at the end of a series of linguistic studies made by Ximénez which he entitled Arte de las tres lenguas Cacchiquel, Quiché y Tzutuhil (Art of the three languages Cacchiquel, Quiché and Tzutuhil). These studies include a brief grammar, confessional, and Catechism in each of the three languages. Brasseur brought the Rabinal Manuscript to Europe as part of a large corpus of native American documents which he had collected in his travels through Mexico and Guatemala. The bound volume containing the Ximénez transcription of the Popol Vuh was purchased after Brasseur’s death by the American collector, Edward E. Ayer, who eventually donated it to the Newberry Library in Chicago, Illinois, where it is catalogued as Ayer MS 1515. The Poetic Nature of the Popol Vuh: The Popol Vuh is not only the most important highland Maya text in terms of its historical and mythological content, it is also a sublime work of literature, composed in rich and elegant poetry. In this respect it can be compared with other great epic poems of the ancient world such as the Ramayana and Mahabharata of India, or the Iliad and Odyssey of Greece. Quiché poetry is not based on rhyme or metrical rhythms, but rather the arrangement of concepts into innovative and even ornate parallel structures. Seldom are the authors content with expressing a single idea without embellishing it with synonymous concepts, metaphors, or descriptive epithets. The Quiché poet is much like the composer of classical music who begins with a simple melody and then weaves into it both complementary and contrasting harmonies to give it interest and depth. Thus endless variations on a given theme are possible. Books such as the Popol Vuh were not simply records of dry history, but universal declarations of the purpose of the world and man’s place in it. The written words were thus intended to conjure up an image in the mind, to give new life and breath to the gods and heroes each time the story was read. The beauty of the work depends not only on the story itself, but on how the story is told. As Munro Edmonson points out, Mayan texts are meant to be “read and pondered rather than skimmed over” (Edmonson 1982, xiii). Yet the beauty of Quiché poetry may sound awkward and repetitive when translated into European languages. Some translators in the past have ignored or failed to recognize the poetic nature of the Popol Vuh, particularly its use of parallelism, and have tried to improve its seemingly purposeless redundancy by eliminating words, phrases, and even whole sections of text which they deemed unnecessary. While this unquestionably helps to make the story flow more smoothly, in keeping with our modern taste for linear plot structure, it detracts from the character of Quiché high literature. Welch points out that “in many ancient contexts, repetition and even redundancy appear to represent the rule rather than the exception” (Welch 1981, 12). The first modern scholar to recognize parallelism in Maya literature was Sir J. Eric Thompson, who noticed that Precolumbian hieroglyphic texts seemed to contain redundant glyphs. Because the ancient Yucatec Maya books of Chilam Balam have similar redundancies, he concluded that these parallel glyphs were intended as a “flowing harmony,” and were “interpolated to improve the cadence of a passage” (Thompson 1950, 61-62). Miguel León-Portilla was the first translator to arrange portions of Quiché and Yucatec Maya documents into poetic verse (León-Portilla 1969, 51-55, 75, 92-93). His recognition of the literary nature of Maya texts was a significant advance over previous translations which virtually ignored the presence of poetry. Nevertheless, his criteria for separating individual poetic lines, or cola, was somewhat haphazard, and he failed to recognize the presence of most forms of parallelism in the text. In his translation of the Popol Vuh, Munro Edmonson arranges the entire text into parallel couplets. He asserts that “the Popol Vuh is primarily a work of literature, and it cannot be properly read apart from the literary form in which it is expressed” (Edmonson 1971, xi). While he has been criticized for failing to identify other types of poetry in his work (D. Tedlock 1983, 230), it is still the only translation of the full text of the Popol Vuh which has emphasized the poetic nature of the text. It is also true that by far the most common arrangement in the Popol Vuh is the parallel couplet. Edmonson himself recognized that his arrangement of the text was not the last word on the literary structure of the Popol Vuh: “I am certain that my reading does not exhaust either the poetry or the sense that is expressed, and that the Popol Vuh contains more of both beauty and meaning than I have found in it” (Edmonson 1971, xiii). For the purposes of the second volume of this monograph, I have arranged the literal translation of the Popol Vuh according to its poetic structure. Lines which are parallel in form or concept have been indented an equal number of spaces from the left margin of the page. TYPES OF PARALLELISM IN THE POPOL VUH: 1. Identical Parallelism: The repetition of identical elements. Example, lines 794-795: Sooty our mouths, Xaq qa chi', Sooty our faces. Xaq qa wach. 2. Synonymous Parallelism: The repetition of elements which are similar in meaning or significance. Example, lines 58-59: Witness of it, Ilol re, Ponderer of it. B'isol re. 3. Antithetic Parallelism: The contrast of one element with an opposite or antithetical element. Example, lines 730-1: Day rain, Q'ijil jab', Night rain. Aq'ab'al jab'. 4. Associative Parallelism: The correlation of elements which are complementary to one another. This association may be material, familial, functional, or gender-based. a. Material association, in which the substance of the elements is similar in nature. Example, lines 243-244: Its cypress groves,U k'isisil, Pine forests its face. U pachajil u wach. b. Familial association, in which elements are related by kinship. Example, lines 5129.5130: First our grandfathers, Nab'e qa mam, Our fathers, Qa qajaw, c. Functional association, in which two elements act in a similar manner. Example, lines 137-138: Merely alone the Framer, Xa u tukel ri Tz'aqol, Shaper, B'itol, d. Gender association, in which two elements are paired as male and female representatives of a parallel occupation. Example, lines 287-288: Says the She Who Has Borne Children, Kacha' ri Alom, He Who Has Begotten Sons: K'ajolom: 5. Augmentive Parallelism: Parallel elements in which one word or phrase clarifies or augments the meaning of another. Example, lines 151-152: Thus surely there is the sky, Keje' k'ut xax k'o wi ri kaj, There is also its Heart Sky. K'o nay puch u K'ux Kaj. 6. Causative Parallelism: Parallel elements in which the first word or phrase directly effects or precipitates the associated words or phrases. Example, lines 716-7: He came Striking Jaguar, Xpe Tukum B'alam, He struck them. Xtukuwik. 7. Epithetic Parallelism: The association of an element with a complementary noun or adjective which serves to define the nature of that element. Example, lines 591-2: This the grandfather, Are' ri mama', This master of tz'ite, Are' aj tz'ite, 8. Alliterative Parallelism: Elements which parallel one another in sound when read aloud. In lines 486-7, the verbs yoj and yoq' were apparently chosen for their similar sounds, in addition to their synonymous meaning: Then they undid it therefore, Ta xkiyoj k'ut, They toppled it again Xkiyoq' chik 9. Grammatical Parallelism: Elements which are grammatically parallel in construction, such as the following example from lines 11-13, in which the same passive verb form is used 10. Alternative Parallelism: Parallelism in which elements appear in an alternating arrangement, such as the following example from lines 591-7, which is arranged ABCA'B'B'C'. This the grandfather, Are' ri mama', as a gerund in each line of the strophe:  Its being manifested,  U k'utunisaxik,  Its being declared,  U q'alajob'isaxik,  Its being expressed as well,  U tzijoxik puch,  This master of tz'ite, Are' aj tz'ite, Xpiyacoc his name. Xpiyakok u b'i'. This therefore the grandmother, Are' k'u ri ati't, Mistress of Days, Aj Q'ij, Mistress of Shaping at its foot, Aj B'it chi raqan, Xmucane her name. Xmuqane u b'i'. 11. Chiasmus, or Reverse Parallelism: Parallelism in which the first element of a strophe parallels the last, the second element parallels the next to last, etc. This arrangement tends to focus attention on the central elements, thus asserting their importance. It is a rather common poetic form in sixteenth century Maya literature, particularly in the Guatemalan highlands, however, none of the known documents composed after 1580 contain passages of chiasmus. Several of these later texts might otherwise be expected to contain ancient poetic forms, since they include significant sections of Precolumbian history and culture. Among these are the Título Zapotitlan, the Título Santa Clara, the Título Chauchituj and the Título Uchabaja. By 1580, however, scribes who possessed ancient codices and were familiar with their contents were for the most part gone. Perhaps by this time the old poetic literary forms were already forgotten or had fallen into disuse (Christenson 1988). The first chiasm that I was able to identify within the Popol Vuh appears in lines 32-35: Midwife,  I'yom,  Patriarch,  Mamom,  Xpiyacoc  Xpiyakok,  Xmucane, their names,  Xmuqane, u b'i',  The name of the “Midwife” in line 32 is Xmucane, which appears in line 35. The name of the “Patriarch” in line 33 is Xpiyacoc, which appears in line 34. The descriptions and proper names of this couple thus appear in a chiastic arrangement. Edmonson, who believed that the Popol Vuh is arranged entirely in paired couplets, was confused by the order of the names Xpiyacoc and Xmucane: “It is odd that this frequent couplet places the male first, the reverse of the usual Quiché order; indeed, if the reconstructed forms are correct, they would make better sense reversed” (Edmonson 1971, 5 n. 35). Recognition of the chiasmus in this passage clears up the confusion (see also lines 538-541 for a repetition of this arrangement). Chiasms may appear within a single line or extend for several lines, as in the following ten line example which is placed at the conclusion of the account of the creation of the first humans (lines 5171-5180), and which is arranged in the form ABCDEE'D'C'B'A'. Then they were multiplied, Ta xpoq'otajik, There at its coming out sun. Chila' chi releb'al q'ij. Truly their names came to be the people: Qi u b'i' xuxik ri winaq: Sovereign, Tepew, Ballplayer, Oloman, Masker, K'ojaj, Sun Lord, K'enech Ajaw, Would be called now their names people. Chuchax chik u b'i' winaq. There its coming out sun Chila' releb'al q'ij They were multiplied. Xpoq'otajik. Within the Popol Vuh, entire sections may appear in chiastic form. The account of the first creation is arranged as a single, large chiasm. Each phase of the creation is outlined in detail from primordial stillness to the formation of the face of the earth, along with its mountains and rivers. The final portion of this section then recapitulates the events of the creation in reverse order: Creation begun with a declaration of the first words concerning the creation (lines 97-117) The sky is in suspense and the earth is submerged in water (lines 118-136) The creation is to be under the direction of Its Heart Sky (lines 137-192) The creation of all things begun (lines 193-201) The creation of earth (lines 202-232) The creation of mountains (lines 233-255) The division of the waters into branches (lines 256-258) “Merely divided then existed waters,” (line 259) “Then were revealed great mountains.” (line 260) “Thus its creation earth this,” (line 261) “Then it was created by them” (line 262) “Its Heart Sky, [who first conceived the creation]” (lines 263-267) “It was set apart the sky, it was set apart also earth within water,” (lines 268-269) “Thus its conception this, when they thought, when they pondered” (lines 270-274) 12. Envelope Parallelism: The repetition of parallel elements at the beginning and end of a long stanza or section of poetry. This has the effect of tying together the introduction and conclusion of a passage to set it apart from that which precedes and follows it. Example, lines 5147-5148 initiate the envelope: These therefore their names Are' k'u ki b'i' Their wives these: Kixoqil wa': This introductory couplet is followed by four couplets listing the wives of the Quiché progenitors. The section is then concluded with a parallel enveloping couplet in lines 5157.5158: These therefore their names Are' k'ut u b'i' Their wives. Kixoqil. Such envelopes may appear at the beginning and end of much larger sections as well. The account of the second creation begins with lines 275-276, describing the formation of the wild animals of the earth: THEN they conceived again TA xkino'jij chik Its animals mountain,U chikopil juyub', The account concludes with lines 432-3, which recapitulate the introductory couplet with a parallel envelope: The animals that are here Ri chikop k'o waral On its face earth. Chuwach ulew. 13. Merismus: The expression of a broad concept by a pair of complementary elements which are narrower in meaning. Thus, in lines 64-65, “sky-earth” represents all creation as a whole. Lines 240-241 use “mountain-valley” to include the face of the earth as a whole. Lines 338-339 use “deer-birds” to describe all wild animals, while lines 748-749 use “dogs.turkeys” to describe all domesticated animals. 14. Emblematic Parallelism: The use of simile to compare elements, often with the use of words such as “like” or “as.” Example, lines 832-833: These therefore the spider monkeys, Are' k'u ri k'oy, Like people they would appear. Keje' ri' winaq chiwachinik. 15. Combination of Parallel Arrangements: The use of two or more types of parallelism in a single strophe. The following example from lines 4948-4956 is a combination of parallel couplets arranged into chiastic form (AABBCB'B'A'A'): MERELY framed,  XA tz'aq,  Merely shaped they are called.  Xa b'it ke'uchaxik.  There was no their mother,  Maja b'i ki chuch,  There was no their father.  Maja b'i ki qajaw.  Merely lone men we would say.  Xa u tukel achij chiqab'ij.  Nor surely woman gave them birth,  Ma na ixoq xe'alanik,  Nor also were they begotten  Ma nay pu xek'ajolaxik  By the Framer,  Rumal ri Aj Tz'aq,  Shaper,  Aj B'it,  Lines 5063-5070 combine alternate parallelism with parallel couplets placed in the third position (ABCCA'B'C'C'): Not therefore good Ma k'u utz They heard it, Xkita'o, The Framer, Ri Aj Tz'aq, Shaper. Aj B'it. “Not good “Mawi utz This they said, Ri' mi xkib'ij, Our framing, Qa tz'aq, Our shaping: Qa b'it: 16. Monocolon: An isolated line which does not parallel any associated line, thus standing on its own. Because monocolons are relatively rare within the Popol Vuh, they are all the more powerful when they do occur. In general they are used when the author desires to give extra emphasis to a passage. Thus line 200 appears as an isolated declaration: Then be it so. Ta' chuxoq. STROPHIC LENGTHS: The various types of parallelism in the Popol Vuh may appear within a pair of lines, or they may extend through multiple lines of text. While the parallel couplet is the standard poetic form in the Popol Vuh, it is by no means the only one. Tedlock recognized this in his work with highland Maya literature: “To measure all Mayan texts by the single standard of the couplet is to miss the very essence of Mayan verse rhythms, which move in twos, and sometimes threes, and once in a while arch over to produce a four” (D. Tedlock 1983b, 230). I would only add that such verse rhythms may also extend beyond four lines to form quintets, sextets, and even longer arrangements. The following are examples of the various strophic types in terms of length found within the Popol Vuh: 1. Parallel Couplets (Bicolon): By far the most common strophic length in the Popol Vuh is the couplet, consisting of two parallel lines. Example, lines 165-166: Then they thought, Ta xena'ojinik, Then they pondered. Ta xeb'isonik. In modern Quiché speech, formal prayers and even everyday conversation tend to utilize parallel couplets. The following selection is from a prayer made by a Quiché priest-shaman in Momostenango as recorded by Barbara Tedlock (B. Tedlock 1982, 197). The translation, orthography and punctuation have not been altered from Tedlock’s transcription, although I have arranged the prayer into couplet form:  Pardon my sin God.  Sachaj la numac Tiox.  Pardon my sin Earth.  Sachaj la numac Mundo.  I am giving my fine,  Quinya'o ri numulta,  my present  nu presenta  before you God,  chiwäch la Tiox,  before you Earth.  chiwäch la Mundo.  I am giving my wax candle,  Quinya'o wa' jun nuceracandela,  my stake  nu tac'alibal  toward the legs  pa ri akän  arms of God  k'äb la Tiox  at the rising of the sun, chirelebal k'ij, at the setting of the sun chukajibal k'ij the four corners of sky, cajxucut kaj, the four corners of earth, cajxucut ulew. Come here then my work, Sa'j la rech c'ut nuchac, my service. nupatan. 2. Parallel Triplets (Tricolon): Three parallel lines of text. Example, lines 374-376: “Speak! “Kixch'awoq! Call upon us! Kojisik'ij! Worship us!” they were told. Kojiq'ijila'!” xe'uchaxik. 3. Parallel Quatrains (Tetracolon): Four parallel lines of text. Example, lines 5034-5037: We speak, Kojch'awik, We listen, Kojta'onik, We ponder, Kojb'isonik, We move. Kojsilab'ik. One interesting phenomenon which appears frequently within longer series of parallel lines is “gapping,” in which an expected word or clause is omitted in one line, although it is implied by the parallelism of the series. Gapping is used in modern Quiché to break up the monotony of a long series of parallel elements. An example in the Popol Vuh appears in lines 66-69, in which the word “four” is expected in the third line, but is not expressed: Its four cornerings, U kaj tz'ukuxik, Its four sidings, U kaj xukutaxik, Its measurings, Retaxik, Its four stakings, U kaj che'xik, 4. Longer parallel series: The following is an example of a parallel sextet in lines 464-469: Merely it would come undone, Xa chiyojomanik, Merely crumbled,  Xa tzub'ulik,  Merely sodden,  Xa neb'elik,  Merely mushy,  Xa lub'anik,  Merely fallen apart,  Xa wulanik,  Merely as well it would dissolve.  Xa pu chi'umarik.  The Popol Vuh is fundamentally based on these various forms of parallelism. Recognition of the presence of parallelism in a given text helps to focus attention on what the authors feel is important. By pairing each thought with complementary ones, the authors are able to develop their ideas with greater clarity. They may compare elements, contrast them, elaborate upon their significance, or add layers of meaning which would not otherwise be obvious. Parallelism is also the primary means used by Quiché authors to give order to their thoughts. The words of the Popol Vuh were not arranged into sentences and paragraphs as in modern literature. The use of periods, commas, and capitalization to separate independent concepts was inconsistent at best, reflecting the authors’ lack of familiarity with European devices for punctuation. Parallelism provided a means of structuring the book’s ideas into distinct and coherent entities. Much of Quiché literature was based in whole, or in part, on oral tradition. Parallelism is a common mnemonic device used in many ancient cultures to help narrators remember the flow and direction of their tale. This is particularly true of the chiastic type of parallelism, which may give order to large sections of a story. It also gives the listener an opportunity to hear a recapitulation in reverse order of what had been said, while reminding him of the central themes that are of special importance. The presence of parallelism in the Popol Vuh is also a tremendous, though unintended, boon to modern translators. By comparing an ambiguous word or passage with its associated line, its general meaning is often clarified. This is especially important when interpreting a word which has more than one possible meaning, or which is poorly transcribed through scribal error. Perhaps the most important reason that I have stressed the poetic nature of the Popol Vuh in this translation is the insight it gives into the mind of the ancient Quiché author. We can see how he organized his thoughts as he took pen or brush in hand to set them down in permanent form. Far from being the random musings of an unlearned storyteller, the Popol Vuh can be appreciated as the eloquent creation of a master poet with a sophisticated literary heritage. Orthography: The Quiché version of the Popol Vuh transcribed by Ximénez was written using a modified Latin alphabet to represent Quiché sounds. Thus x is used to represent the sh sound of English; h represents the hard Spanish j; and v represents the English w. For the most part, the letters used were based on those standardized by the Franciscan priest Francisco de la Parra in 1545. The orthography is therefore consistent with the writing system taught by Christian missionaries during the early Spanish Colonial period, although the Popol Vuh text is much less consistent in its use of the Parra alphabet than other contemporary documents such as the Título Totonicapán (Carmack and Mondloch 1983) or the Título Yax (Carmack and Mondloch 1989). Variant spellings of words occur throughout the manuscript and glottalized sounds in particular are haphazardly distinguished at best. Even when used faithfully, however, the Parra alphabet presents a number of problems in interpretation, since the Quiché language includes several sounds which have no equivalents in this system. Long and short vowels are treated as separate letters in Quiché and should be distinguished when written. The Ximénez transcription of the Popol Vuh seldom makes such distinctions. For example, the word transcribed as vach might be read with a long vowel vach (“my companion”), or with a short vowel väch (“my face”). The Quiché language utilizes both a palatal stop (k) and a uvular stop (q). The Popol Vuh manuscript uses a single letter (c) to represent both these sounds. In addition, each of these has a glottalized form (k') and (q'), pronounced by occluding the vocal apparatus momentarily and then opening it forcefully to create a mildly-explosive release of sound. Because the Latin alphabet has no equivalent for glottalized sounds, Parra invented letters to represent them. The Popol Vuh manuscript however does not consistently use the Parra glottalized letters for the palatal and uvular consonants. In most cases it either ignores glottalization altogether, representing them with the letter c, or uses the letter q to represent both glottalized forms. As a result, the single letter “c” may have four equally plausible readings. For example, the word cac might be read as kak (their gourd); kaq (red); kaq (their peccary); kak' (their turkey); qak (our gourd); qak' (our turkey); qaq (our peccary); kaq' (their tongues); qaq' (our tongues); k'ak' (new); k'aq (to throw); q'ak (flea); or q'aq' (fire). Four other combinations are possible which have no known meaning in modern usage, but which might have existed in the archaic language of the sixteenth century. The glottalized forms of other consonants and vowels are also either ignored or used inconsistently in the Ximénez manuscript. Thus there is often no difference between the written form of che (toward him/her) and che' (tree). Imagine the difficulties for the reader when the words tzaq (to thrown down) and tz'aq (to frame or build) appear with the same spelling. If this weren’t confusing enough, words which appear to be contextually the same may appear with variant spellings. The Quiché authors who composed the text in the sixteenth century were pioneers in the use of a foreign alphabet to represent their language in written form. They did not have the luxury of officially recognized dictionaries with standardized spellings, nor did they have computers to scan for errors. In light of the enormous difficulties involved in its composition, the Popol Vuh manuscript is remarkably consistent, although discrepancies in spelling inevitably appear in the text. It is impossible to know how many variant spellings crept into the text as a result of scribal errors made by Ximénez when he copied his version from the original manuscript. At one point, Ximénez copied eleven lines of the same passage of text twice (folio 8r). He caught his mistake and crossed out the repeated section. If no scribal errors were made, the two transcriptions should be identical, yet Edmonson found an average of one discrepancy every five lines in the duplicated section (Edmonson 1971, 46). Without the original document composed by the Quichés, a perfect reading of the text is impossible to verify. Since the sixteenth century, a number of writing systems have been invented for Quiché in an attempt to avoid the confusion inherent in the Parra alphabet. Unfortunately, this has resulted in the proliferation of a great many competing systems without a consensus as to which should be the standard. Many of these utilize letters not found in the modern European alphabet, making them impossible to use with most typewriters and computer keyboards. In 1986 the Guatemalan Ministry of Public Education set up a commission to standardize alphabets for the twenty-one recognized highland Maya languages. This standardization effort had become particularly important due to the Guatemalan government’s proposed “Program of Bilingual Education” in Mayan communities, designed to improve literacy and promote native American cultures and languages. This program included the publication of bilingual dictionaries, school textbooks, and official translations of the Guatemalan Constitution in the various highland Maya languages. The results of this commission were officially endorsed by the Guatemalan government and signed into law as Governmental Decree Number 1046-87 by President Marco Vinicio Cerezo Arévalo on November 23, 1987. The following is a list of the modified Latin letters developed by Parra as used in the Popol Vuh text, along with the modern orthographic equivalents and a guide to pronunciation: Parra  Modern  a, aa  a  As in the a of “father.”  a  ä  As in the o of “mother.”  b  b'  Similar to the English b, but pronounced with the throat closed while  air is forcefully expelled to produce a glottal stop.  ch ch Asin the ch of “child.” qh, ch ch' Pronounced with the tongue in the same position as for the ch, but the throat is closed and air forcefully expelled to produce a glottalized ch. e,ee e Asin the a of “late.” i,ÿ,ii i Asin the ee in “eel.” h j Pronounced like the English h, but deeper in the throat. Similar to the Spanish j or the German ch (as in the proper name “Bach”).  c, q c, q  k k'  Similar to the k in “king.” Pronounced with the tongue in the same position as for the k, but the throat is closed and air forcefully expelled to produce a glottalized k.  l  l  Pronounced like the English l, but with the tongue moved forward to contact the upper incisor teeth. When appearing as the terminal letter in a word, this sound is immediately followed by the h as in the English word “hot.”  m n o, oo p c, q  m n o p q  As in the m of “mat.” As in the n of “net.” As in the o of “home.” Pronounced like the English p but shortened in length. Pronounced from further back in the throat than the letter k, similar to the kh in the Egyptian word ankh.  e, c, q  q'  Pronounced with the tongue in the same position as for the q, but the throat is closed and air forcefully expelled to produce a glottalized q.  r  r  Similar to the Spanish r, pronounced with a brief tap of the tongue against the roof of the mouth.  z t d, t  s t t'  As in the s of “sit.” Similar to the English t but shortened in length. Pronounced with the tongue in the same position as for the t, but the throat is closed and air forcefully expelled to produce a glottalized t.  tz  tz  As in the ts of “mats.”  tz, q, tz' Pronounced with the tongue in the same position as for the tz, but the throat is closed and air forcefully expelled to produce a glottalized tz. u,v,uu u Asin the oo of “root” v,u w Asin the w of “wind.” x x Pronounced like the sh in “shy.” y,i y Asin the y of “yellow.” When appearing as the terminal letter in a word, it is pronounced like the ee in “eel,” immediately followed by English h as in “hot.” ' Glottalization mark for vowels. For example a' would be similar to the pronunciation of the ott in the Scottish pronunciation of “bottle.” Generally there is no equivalent for glottalized vowels in the Popol Vuh, although occasionally a double vowel may have been intended to serve this purpose. I have used the modern alphabet in my literal translation and transcription of the Quiché text. When pronouncing Maya words, the emphasis is always on the final syllable. When pronouncing Nahua words, the emphasis is always on the next to last syllable. Due to the haphazard nature of commas and periods in the Popol Vuh text, I have altered the punctuation to conform with modern usage, but otherwise the grammatical constructions and word order of the original manuscript have not been altered in the literal translation. In order to avoid interpretations of spelling with regard to proper names, which in many cases would be little more than a guess, I have left them in their original Parra Latin spelling. To maintain consistency in this regard, I have used Quiché throughout this book, the spelling found in the original manuscript rather than the modern K'iche'. POPOL VUH PREAMBLE1 THIS IS THE BEGINNING2 OF THE ANCIENT TRADITIONS3 of this place called Quiché.4 HERE we shall write.5 We shall begin6 to tell the ancient stories of the beginning, the origin of all that was done in the citadel7 of Quiché, among the people of the Quiché nation.8 1 lines 1-96 2 The Quiché word xe' (root) is used here to describe the beginning or foundation of the authors’ words concerning the history of the Quiché people. The subsequent narrative is thus seen as growing like a plant from this “root” (lines 4-6). 3 The Popol Vuh manuscript does not utilize capitalization or punctuation to differentiate sentences. Capitalization is, however, used to mark the beginning of what the authors consider to be the major divisions of their story. In general, only the first word of each new section is capitalized. In this translation, I have marked these divisions by capitalizing the first word of the introductory line where appropriate. In two instances (lines 1 and 97), the entire introductory line is capitalized in the manuscript. Line 1 introduces the preamble of the text, while line 97 is the first line of the body of the story itself. 4 The authors at various times refer to the land, the nation, the capital city, and the people themselves as Quiché (K'iche' in the modern orthography of the Maya languages), meaning “many trees” or “forest.” The homeland of the Quiché people in western Guatemala is mountainous and heavily forested. 5 The authors here state that they are “writing” this history. The people of ancient Mesoamerica (roughly the area of Central Mexico southward to Guatemala, Belize, and parts of Honduras and El Salvador) were the only literate Precolumbian cultures in the New World. Following the Spanish conquest, native Americans were discouraged from using their own ancient writing systems in favor of the Latin script. The manuscript of the Popol Vuh was thus written in the Mayan language of the Quichés, but with a European script. It is this set of circumstances that has preserved the Popol Vuh in a fully readable form when so many other native American texts were either destroyed or written in an as yet incompletely decipherable glyphic form. 6 Tikib'a' is literally “to plant.” “The beginning,” also in this sentence, is therefore literally “the planting.” 7 Based on tinamit, a Nahua-derived word meaning “fortified town, citadel, or fortification wall” (Campbell 1983, 85). Although in modern Quiché, tinamit simply refers to a town or city, the word is used in the Popol Vuh text to specify fortified centers occupied by ruling lineages (Carmack 1981, 23). Here the citadel of the Quiché people is also called Quiché, apparently referring to the heartland region of their nation. This would include the capital city, Cumarcah, as well as its surrounding territory. Here we shall gather the manifestation, the declaration, the account of the sowing9 and the dawning10 by11 the Framer12 and the Shaper,13 She Who Has Borne Children and 8 Amaq' may refer to a geographic entity such as a town or region, as well as the group of people who occupy that territory. It may also describe a group of people unified by a common language and/or ethnic origin, such as a lineage, clan, or tribe (Hill 1996, 64; Akkeren 2000, 24). Thus Cook defines amaq' as composed of endogamous landholding communities subordinate to the lord or patrilineage head centered at his tinamit (2000, 27). Hill and Monaghan identify the amaq' as an alliance of confederated lineage groups (1987, 74). Amaq' also implies something that is permanent, fixed, stable, secure, or settled. I have chosen to use the word “nation” as this is the currently preferred term for Native American groups as well as their territorial possessions. 9 The manuscript reads euaxibal (obscurity, that which is hidden in darkness). This is likely a transcription error for auaxibal (sowing, that which is sown), a concept that is paired with “dawning” throughout the text as a metaphor for the creation (see pp. 71, 78-82, 110, 206-207, 227; lines 196-197, 209-210, 442-443, 543-544, 612-613, 1653-1654, 5091-5092). 10 The primary focus of the creation is to form humanity (cf. pp. 70-71; lines 213-218). The “sowing” and “dawning” of this couplet may refer in a literal sense to a new beginning, but may also be interpreted in human terms. In addition, tz'uk (germinate/sprout) is used as a metaphor for human birth (Coto). Among the Quichés, when a woman becomes pregnant, the event is announced by a respected elder of the community at certain lineage shrines. This ceremony is referred to as “the sowing” of the future child (B. Tedlock 1982, 80). In Santiago Atitlán, when an infant is born it is said that “he (or she) sprouted” (Carlsen 1997, 54). The “dawning” also refers to the dawn of humanity, as indicated by the reference to “anyone” rather than “anything” on p. 71. In the Quiché language, to give birth is “to dawn” or “to give light” (-ya' saq). In Chichicastenango children are called alaj q'ij (little sun) or alaj q'ij saj (little ray of sun) when they are referred to in ritual contexts (Schultze-Jena 1954, 25). 11 The following is a long list of deities, arranged in pairs, which the Quichés believed to have participated in the creation at the beginning of time. The list consists of not only the names of separate gods, but their titles and secondary names as well. It is thus difficult to distinguish how many gods are really involved. In some cases, titles are definitively assigned to individual gods later in the text. In other cases, gods can be assumed to be separate individuals when they appear simultaneously in different locations or when they engage in conversation as distinct entities. When these instances are taken into consideration, there appear to be only three pairs of gods who actively participate in the creation—the Framer and the Shaper, Sovereign and Quetzal Serpent, and Xmucane and Xpiyacoc. Without their titles, the same six names appear together planning the creation on p. 68 (lines 137-144) and again in connection with the creation of humankind on p. 197 (lines 4963-4968). Later in the account, yet another god, Heart of Sky, will be named as the presiding deity who oversees the work (pp. 70-72; lines 183-184). 12 Tz'aqol (Framer) refers to one who makes something by putting things together (i.e., a building from stone or adobe, a meal from various ingredients, or a woven cloth from individual threads). 13 B'itol (Shaper) refers to one who makes something by modeling (i.e., pottery from clay, or a sculpture from carved stone), thus giving shape to an otherwise amorphous substance. The Framer and the Shaper are the most frequently mentioned gods involved in the creation of the world and its inhabitants. Their names imply that the creation involved giving frame and shape to matter that already existed rather than conjuring something out of nothing. This pair of gods was so important that soon after the Spanish conquest, Father Domingo de Vico used their Quiché names to refer to the God of the Old Testament (Carmack and Mondloch 1983, 206). He Who Has Begotten Sons,14 as they are called; along with Hunahpu Possum15 and Hunahpu Coyote,16 Great White Peccary17 and Coati,18 Sovereign19 and Quetzal Serpent,20 Heart of Lake and Heart of Sea,21 Creator of the Green Earth and Creator of the Blue Sky,22 as they are called. 14 These are titles for the divine couple, Xmucane and Xpiyacoc (see p. 80; lines 557-558). Ximénez translated their Quiché names, Alom and K'ajolom, as simply “Mother” and “Father.” A more accurate translation for Alom, however, is “She Who Has Borne Children,” from the perfect aspect of the root verb al (to bear children). The name of the male god, K'ajolom, specifically indicates his having begotten male offspring, thus “He Who Has Begotten Sons.” Fray Bartolomé de las Casas wrote in the sixteenth century that the people of Guatemala worshiped as their principal gods “the Great Father and the Great Mother that were in heaven,” apparently referring to this divine couple (Las Casas 1967, III.cxxiv.650). 15 Hunahpu Possum and Hunahpu Coyote are also likely titles for the gods Xpiyacoc and Xmucane (see pp. 79-80; lines 498-501). For a discussion of the etymology of the name Hunahpu, see footnote 163. Wuch' is the opossum (Didelphis yucatanensis), which appears later in the text presiding over the moments immediately preceding the rising of the sun (pp. 173-174; lines 4144-4151). In the Dresden Codex (Lee 1985, folios 25-28, pp. 51-52), the aged deity Mam, likely a lowland Maya version of Xpiyacoc, is depicted as a possum presiding over the five days of the Uayeb prior to the beginning of the new year. Father Thomás Coto, who compiled a dictionary of the closely related Cakchiquel-Maya language in the seventeenth century, mentions under the Spanish word Escuridad, that vuch is the darkness of night just prior to the dawn (Coto 1983, 207-8). 16 Utiw is the coyote (Canis latrans), an animal also associated with the night. 17 Saqi Nima Aq (Great White Peccary). The word saqi may be translated as “light, bright, or white.” Later in the text (p. 98; line 1055), this same god is described as having very white hair due to his advanced age; thus “white” is the most likely translation here. In that same passage, “Great White Peccary” is given as one of the names or titles of the patriarchal creator god Xpiyacoc mentioned in the next paragraph. There are two species of peccary, or wild pig, living in Central America—Peccari angulatus yucatanensis (Collared Peccary) and Tayassu pecari (White-lipped Peccary). The latter is perhaps intended here because it is the larger of the two and is decorated with white facial markings. 18 This is another name or title for the female creator goddess Xmucane, mentioned in the next paragraph (see p. 62; line 1056). The coati, or coatimundi, which inhabits tropical Central America is Nasua narica yucatanica. It is a raccoonlike animal with a long tail and a long, pointed, flexible snout. 19 Tepew (Sovereign) is one of several words in the Popol Vuh that were borrowed from the central Mexican group of languages, Nahua, variants of which were spoken by both the epi-Toltec and Aztec nations. This word is the Quiché form of the Nahua tepeuh, meaning “conqueror” or “majesty” (Campbell 1970, 4). Coto and Basseta record that in the Colonial era, the Quichés recognized the word as referring to “majesty, dignity, lordship, power.” Tedlock and Recinos translate the word as “sovereign,” which I prefer to the more descriptive “majesty” used by Edmonson. 20 Q'ukumatz may be translated as “Quetzal Serpent” or, less accurately, as “Feathered Serpent.” Q'uq' refers to the quetzal bird, Pharomacrus mocinno, one of the most beautiful birds in the world. It inhabits the cloud forests of southern Mesoamerica between 3,000 and 4,000 feet in elevation. Both male and female have brilliantly colored iridescent blue/green feathers on their wings, tail, and crest, while their breasts are a bright crimson. The shade of blue or green depends on the angle of light striking its feathers. These collectively are evoked and given expression as the Midwife23 and the Patriarch,24 whose names are 25Xpiyacoc26 and Xmucane,27 the Protector28 and the The male quetzal’s tail feathers were highly prized by Maya royalty for their beauty and size, often reaching three feet in length. The unique coloration of the bird carried profound religious significance for the Maya. Its predominant blue/green feathers represented sky and vegetation, both symbols of life. Its red breast represented fire, the force that quickens life. Kumatz is a general term for “snake” or “serpent.” The serpent was a common Maya symbol for regeneration or rebirth because of its tendency to periodically shed its skin to reveal a newer and brighter one. The combination of an avian lord of the skies with a serpentine lord of the earth and underworld gave this god power over all levels of the Maya universe. He is undoubtedly related to the well-known god Quetzalcoatl (Nahua for “Quetzal Serpent) worshiped by the Aztecs of Central Mexico. 21 These are likely titles for Sovereign and Quetzal Serpent, who are associated with water (see p. 68; lines 140-143; Recinos and Goetz 1953b, 76). K'ux may refer to either “heart” or “spirit.” This pair of deities thus embodies the inward powers of large, standing bodies of water. The Popol Vuh states that prior to the creation the world consisted of a vast expanse of placid waters from which all things emerged (p. 67; lines 129-136). 22 These are likely titles for Xpiyacoc and Xmucane (see p. 80; lines 565-566). They literally mean “blue/green plate” and “blue/green bowl.” The Quiché language has only one word, räx, for both blue and green. When distinguishing between the colors, modern Quiché people are forced to say “räx like the sky” for blue, or “räx like a tree” for green. This same type of dichotomy appears here. The “blue/green plate” refers to the green surface of the earth covered with vegetation, and the arch of the sky is envisioned as an inverted “blue bowl.” The earth is specifically likened to a plate on p. 71 (lines 205-206). 23 Midwife and Patriarch are titles for Xmucane and Xpiyacoc (see p. 80; lines 536-537). I'yom may be literally translated as “She Who Has Had Grandchildren,” but the word is also commonly used as an affectionate title for a midwife. I have chosen this interpretation here. The title of the goddess implies that she assists in the “birth” of the world. 24 Mamom may also be translated as “He Who Has Had Grandchildren.” In this case, it is more likely a title of respect for the god as a grandfatherly patriarch who oversees the creation. In modern Quiché society, mamom is a title used on occasion to refer to the head of patrilineage groups. They are often consulted on important family matters. They also participate directly in the rituals of marriage, the blessing and naming of children, and the consultation of dead ancestors to determine their will. Tedlock translates Mamom as “Matchmaker,” since one of the intercessory tasks that such individuals have is to petition for the hand in marriage of a prospective bride on behalf of a member of his lineage (D. Tedlock 1996, 63, 217). This translation seems somewhat limited in its scope, however, considering the range of responsibilities held by the lineage patriarch. 25 The names of the Midwife and Patriarch are given here as Xpiyacoc and Xmucane, but in reverse order. Throughout the Popol Vuh, female deities are listed before male deities when paired in parallel couplets. It thus makes little sense that Xpiyacoc, the name of the grandfather god, would be written before that of Xmucane, his female counterpart. This is an example of chiasmus, a form of reverse parallelism in which the first element of a strophe parallels the last, the second element parallels the next to last, etc. This arrangement, rather common in the text (see introductory section on poetics), tends to focus attention on the central elements, thus asserting their importance. The passage is thus arranged in the following way in lines Xmucane, their names. Xmuqane, u b'i'. 32-35 of the literal translation:  Midwife,  I'yom,  Patriarch,  Mamom,  Xpiyacoc,  Xpiyakok,  The name of the “Midwife” in line 32 is Xmucane, which appears in line 35. The name of the “Patriarch” in line 33 is Xpiyacoc, which appears in line 34. Edmonson, who believed that the Popol Vuh is arranged entirely in paired couplets, was confused by the order of the names Xpiacoc and Xmucane: “It is odd that this frequent couplet places the male first, the reverse of the usual Quiché order; indeed, if the reconstructed forms are correct, they would make better sense reversed” (Edmonson 1971, p. 5, n. 35). Recognition of the chiasmic nature of this passage clears up the confusion (see also p. 80; lines 538-541 for a repetition of this arrangement with regard to Xpiyacoc and Xmucane). 26 Xpiyacoc is the male deity, while Xmucane serves as the divine female principal that brings about the creation. The derivation of the name Xpiyacoc is problematic. Edmonson suggests that it is based on the Nahua yex-pa-ococc(an-e), which he reads as “thrice in another two places,” and relates it to the next phrase of the text in which this deity is referred to as “twice patriarch.” Tedlock prefers that it should be read as a Quiché name, and that it is based on the verb yekik/yakik, which his Quiché collaborator interpreted as “to be put in order, to be lifted up” with regard to the problems of clients who are under treatment by aj q'ij priests. Perhaps the most likely derivation of this name is found at Rabinal where there is a design woven into textiles which locals call piyakok and identify as a turtle (Akkeren 2000, 207, 261.264). Kok is “turtle” in both lowland and highland Maya languages, making this an intriguing possibility. At Chichen Itza as well as Mayapan (both post-Classic sites likely contemporary with the early history of the Quichés), the aged grandfather earth deity (God N, Pauahtun, Bacab, Mam) wears a turtle carapace and bears up the sky (Taube 1992, 92-99; Schele and Mathews 1998, 214-218). Among the contemporary Kekchi and Pokomchi, this god is identified as the Mam (Grandfather), an earth deity who oversees the five day Uayeb period prior which precedes the beginning of the new year in the ancient calendric system. It is possible that Xpiyacoc is the Quiché version of this deity. Ultimately, a definitive etymology is impossible to determine. When proper names are passed down through generations of time, they often tend to become altered in their pronunciation, and perhaps their original meaning as well. If Xpiyacoc is derived from a Nahua original, it had certainly become mangled to the point where an Aztec envoy at the Quiché court would have had a difficult time coming up with an obvious meaning for it in his language. The same is true for Yucatec, Cholan, or Mam derivations for the name. There are similar-sounding words in each of these languages, although none are a precise fit. It is thus possible that the Quichés of the sixteenth century preserved the archaic spelling because they saw it simply as a proper name, without necessarily preserving memory of its original derivation (see also footnote 163 with regard to this phenomenon). I have chosen to leave such names untranslated. 27 The name Xmucane may be derived from x-(feminine marker, diminutive) plus muqik (to bury, to cover, plant in the ground), thus giving a possible reading of “She Who Buries or She Who Plants,” referring to the planting of a seed in the earth or a developing child in the womb. Ximénez wrote that native priests in his day called upon Xmucane and Xpiyacoc for inspiration, particularly concerning the birth of infants and midwifery (Ximénez 1929-31, I.i.6). Alternatively the name may be derived from the verb muqunik (to see, look). Xmucane and Xpiyacoc are referred to as seers several times in the text (see pp. 79.80; lines 511-517; 522-23). Akkeren suggests that the name should be derived from Yucatec and read as “Curved/Buried is your Tail.” He associates her with a scorpion deity based on the name of a scorpion textile motif at Rabinal—muqje (tail in highland Maya languages is je, however its lowland Maya equivalent is ne), as well as an entry in the Ritual of the Bacabs referring to a scorpion entity as bul moc a ne (well-curved is your tail) (Arzápalo Marín 1987, 385-386; Akkeren 2000, 262-264). It may be fruitless to seek for a single meaning for such deity names as these. Particularly with regard to names and archaic words used in ceremonial contexts, Quichés derive a host of meanings from them, including puns and other word plays. Thus Barbara Tedlock points out that each named day in the traditional highland Maya calendar has a range of potential meanings, all of which are equally valid depending on context. For example, in interpreting a divinatory outcome, the meaning of the day C'at may be derived from c'atic (to burn), pa c'at (in nets), or c'asaj c'olic (to be in debt) (B. Tedlock 1982, 110). This is one reason I prefer to leave such names untranslated. Xmucane is likely the Quiché version of the grandmother goddess of the Maya lowlands (Goddess O, Chac Chel, Ix Chel). Like God N, the grandmother Goddess O is associated both with the forces of destruction and creation. On folio 74 of the Dresden Codex she is shown pouring Shelterer,29 Twice Midwife and Twice Patriarch, as they are called in Quiché traditions. They gave voice to all things and accomplished their purpose in purity of being and in truth.30 This account we shall now write under the law of God31 and Christianity.32 We shall bring it forth because there is no longer the means whereby the Popol Vuh may be seen,33 the means of seeing clearly that had come from across the sea—the account of our out water from an inverted jar, symbolic of the destruction of the world by flood (Lee 1985, 77; Taube 1992, 101; Thompson 1972, 99). A skeletized version of this goddess wearing a crossed-bone skirt is paired with God N on the columns of the Lower Temple of the Jaguars at Chichen Itza. She is paired with God N as well on the upper columns of the Temple of the Warriors, suggesting a close association. Despite her destructive aspect, Goddess O is also considered the great creatrix, the principle deity of creation, divination, medicine, childbirth, midwifery, and weaving (Tozzer 1941, 129, 154; Taube 1992, 101; Akkeren 2000, 241), all aspects characteristic of the grandmother goddess Xmucane. 28 Edmonson translated matzanel as “shelterer,” while Tedlock translated it as “defender.” A more literal translation would be “embracer,” but with the implication that this embrace is meant to be protective in nature. 29 The root verb, ch'uq, means “to cover.” Thus, the translation “shelterer” refers to a deity who provides a protective shelter or cover. 30 The phrase is saqil k'olem, saqil tzij. Saqil is a word laden with implied meanings in the Quiché language. These include “light, clarity, whiteness, brightness, and purity.” K'olem is “existence, being,” as well as the “nature or essence” of a thing. Saqil tzij is literally “white word, or truth,” but it may also refer to “posterity, generation, or dynastic succession within a royal family.” As a verb it means “to light” a fire or candle. 31 U ch'ab'al Dios (his speech/language God). This phrase is often used in Roman Catholic sermons to refer to the doctrine, or preaching, of the Christian God. It also has a legalistic interpretation (law, declaration, proclamation), without religious overtones. The latter reading seems preferable as the Popol Vuh text is not written as a Christian doctrinal treatise. 32 Here, the authors of the Popol Vuh confirm that they are compiling the ancient traditions of their people under the law of Christianity, imposed following the Spanish conquest. Surprisingly, Dios (God) and Christianoil (Christianity) are the only examples of Christian or Spanish-derived words in the Popol Vuh until the end of the text, where the arrival of the Spaniards is described. This lack of intrusive Spanish words argues for the purity of the text as an accurate record of Precolumbian cosmology and history. The Popol Vuh therefore stands in marked contrast to other post-Conquest highland Maya texts such as the Annals of the Cakchiquels and the Título Totonicapán, which contain numerous biblical and European cultural allusions using borrowed Spanish words. Although this passage acknowledges that the Quiché nation is subject to Christianity, the authors unabashedly describe the glory and wisdom of their ancient gods. Page 63 of the text (lines 44-45) declares that the Quiché gods act “in purity of being and in truth,” perhaps indirectly contradicting the Christian missionaries of the time, who characterized such Maya deities as devils or demons. obscurity, and the means of seeing life clearly, as it is said. The original book exists that was written anciently,34 but its witnesses and those who ponder35 it hide their faces.36 Great is its performance37 and its account of the completion and germination38 of all the sky and earth—its four corners and its four sides. All then was measured and staked out into four divisions, doubling over and stretching the measuring cords of the womb of sky and the womb of earth.39 Thus were established the four corners, the four 33 Vuh refers to Maya books, or codices painted on deerskin or bark paper. Popol is derived from the root pop, meaning “mat.” Thus a literal translation would be “book that pertains to the mat.” Within ancient Quiché society, a woven mat was used as a royal throne from which the king gave counsel to his people. The mat symbolized the power not only of the ruler, but also of his subjects. In this sense, the interlaced fibers of the mat represented the unity of the members within the community, linked inseparably in a common purpose. Thus Ximénez translated popol as “community,” and the Motul Dictionary glosses popol na as a “community house.” Popol Vuh might then be interpreted as “Book of the Community” or “Counsel Mat Book.” I have chosen to leave the title untranslated, because no literal English equivalent could convey adequately its full meaning. I have kept the traditional spelling of the book’s name, Popol Vuh, rather than the more modern orthographic spelling, Popol Wuj, since it is the original form used by the Quiché authors in the sixteenth century manuscript. 34 This line apparently refers to a painted version of the Popol Vuh written prior to the Spanish conquest, which served as the inspiration for the text that survives today. 35 B'isonel is generally “one who mourns or is unhappy.” Coto notes that it may also refer to one who “ponders, considers, or has compassion.” 36 It is significant that this passage affirms that it is the “witness” and “ponderer” of the ancient book who “hide their faces,” not the book itself. The authors of the Popol Vuh were anonymous, perhaps out of fear of persecution should the manuscript be discovered by the Spanish authorities. Edmonson suggests that the “witness” who hides his face may have been the author himself (Edmonson 1971, 7 n. 56). This reading also suggests that the Precolumbian version of the Popol Vuh may have still existed when the Quiché authors were compiling their alphabetic version. 37 Pe'oxik refers to something which has been hired or rented. Dennis Tedlock convincingly suggests this refers to the hiring of persons to perform the text of the Popol Vuh as a drama (D. Tedlock 1996, 219, n. 63). 38 Tz'uk is a term used for any type of birth (Coto), although it most often refers to the “birth” of plants in the form of germination or sprouting (Basseta, Varea). 39 The gods thus laid out the extent of their creation by measuring its boundaries, driving stakes to mark its four corners, and stretching a measuring cord between the stakes. Andrés Xiloj, a modern Quiché aj q’ij priest who worked with Tedlock on his translation of the Popol Vuh, recognized the terminology of this passage and explained that the gods were measuring out the sky and earth as if it were a maizefield being laid out for cultivation (D. Tedlock 1996, 220). Vogt quoted a Tzotzil-Maya from Zinacantán as saying that the universe is “like a house, like a table,” representing that which is systematic, and well-ordered (Vogt 1993, 11). Wisdom also recorded that the Chortí-Maya of Guatemala considered both the squared maize field and the shamanic altars on which traditionalist Maya priests conduct their divination rituals to be the sides,40 as it is said, by the Framer and the Shaper, the Mother and the Father41 of life and all creation,42 the giver of breath43 and the giver of heart,44 they who give birth and give heart to the light everlasting,45 the child of light born of woman and the son of light born of man,46 they who are compassionate47 and wise in all things—all that exists in the sky and on the earth, in the lakes and in the sea. world in miniature (Wisdom 1940, 430). By laying out the maize field, or setting up a ritual table, the Maya transform secular models into sacred space. With regard to the maize field, this charges the ground with the power of creation to bear new life. In a similar way, the divinatory table provides a stage on which sacred geography may be initimately studied, and even altered. Note that on pp. 81-82 (lines 565-623) the creator deities carry out a divinatory ceremony in an attempt to create the first human beings. A prominent Quiché aj q’ij priest, named Don Vicente de León Abac, described his work to me in this way: “When I am seated at my table, I am aj nawal mesa [of, or pertaining to, the spirit essence of the table]. My body is in the form of a cross just like the four sides of the world. This is why I face to the east and behind me is the west. My left arm extends out toward the north, and my right arm points to the south. My heart is the center of myself just as the arms of the cross come together to form its heart. My head extends upward above the horizon so that I can see far away. Because I am seated this way I can speak to Mundo [World].” 40 Coto defines xukut as “side.” Basseta defines it as “corner,” in which case this would be synonymous with the preceding tz'uk (corner, angle). 41 When paired together, chuch-qajaw (mother-father) is the title for the highly respected head of a patrilineage group or the patriarchal founder of a patrilineage. If this couplet is meant as a single title, then the Framer and the Shaper are being addressed as the great founders of the family of all living. In modern Quiché society, traditionalist aj q'ij priests may refer to deity and ancestors as chuch tat (mother fathers) in their ritual prayers (Schultze-Jena 1954, 99). 42 This word is a gerund derived from the verb winaqirik, which may be translated “to create or to generate.” The root, winaq, means “people”; therefore a more literal translation would be “to people.” The creation is thus seen as similar to the way people come to be, a natural process of giving birth. 43 “Breath” is also a metaphor for “spirit,” or that which constitutes a person’s life force. 44 K'uxlanel (literally “heartener”). The heart is the central defining essence of a person, or what might be referred to as the soul. Thus the creators are those who ensoul living things. In addition, the Quichés use “hearten” to refer to someone who provides for, looks after, tends to, or counsels someone. The verbal form of this word also has the sense of “to remember.” In English this would be “bear in mind,” but for the Quichés this would be conceived as “bear in heart.” 45 Amaq'il, when used as an adjective, is something that is “eternal, perpetual, everlasting.” 46 These are likely metaphors for the living. Thus in modern Quiché prayers, priests refer to the dead as may k'ij may sákj, “they who are hidden from the sun, hidden from the light” (Schultze-Jena 1954, 52). 47 This is the same term, aj b'is, used to describe the “ponderer” of the Popol Vuh text in line 59. Coto notes that it not only describes one who ponders, but who does so with sympathy or compassion. THE PRIMORDIAL WORLD48 THIS IS THE ACCOUNT of when all is still silent and placid.49 All is silent and calm.50 Hushed51 and empty is the womb of the sky. THESE, then, are the first words, the first speech. There is not yet one person, one animal, bird, fish, crab, tree, rock, hollow, canyon, meadow, or forest. All alone the sky exists. The face of the earth has not yet appeared. Alone lies the expanse of the sea, along with the womb of all the sky. There is not yet anything gathered together. All is at rest. Nothing stirs. All is languid, at rest in the sky. There is not yet anything standing erect. Only the expanse of the water, only the tranquil sea lies alone.52 There is not yet anything that might exist. All lies placid and silent in the darkness, in the night. All alone are the Framer and the Shaper, Sovereign and Quetzal Serpent, They Who Have Borne Children and They Who Have Begotten Sons. Luminous53 they are in the water,54 wrapped in quetzal feathers and cotinga55 feathers. Thus they are called 48 lines 97-154 49 The authors place the following description of the primordial world in the present tense, thus painting a picture of the stillness that existed prior to the creation as if in vision before their eyes. 50 In the sixteenth-century Cakchiquel-Maya dictionary compiled by Francisco de Varea, silee refers to the calming of the wind after a storm (Varea 1929). 51 Lolinik refers to hushed, undifferentiated sounds such as the rustling of leaves in the wind or the soft hum of insects in the night. 52 This description of the world prior to the first creation is similar to Mixtec tradition as recorded by Fray Gregorio García in his Origen de los Indios del Nuevo Mundo e Islas Occidentales: “In the year and in the day of obscurity and utter darkness, before there were days and years, the world being in deep obscurity, when all was chaos and confusion, the earth was covered with water, there was only mud and slime on the surface of the earth” (León-Portilla 1980, 145). 53 In his Vocabulario de lengua quiche, Domingo de Basseta interprets zaktetoh as “the brightness that enters through cracks.” Thus the brightness of the gods is seen as shining between the feathers that envelop them. Quetzal Serpent. In their essence, they are great sages, great possessors of knowledge. Thus surely there is the sky. There is also Heart of Sky,56 which is said to be the name of the god.57 THE CREATION OF THE EARTH58 THEN came his word. Heart of Sky arrived here with Sovereign and Quetzal Serpent in the darkness, in the night. He spoke with Sovereign and Quetzal Serpent. They talked together then. They thought and they pondered. They reached an accord,59 54 “Quetzal Serpent,” whose Quiché name is traditionally written Qucumatz in colonial documents, is associated with water in most ancient highland Maya texts. According to the Annals of the Cakchiquels, a group of highland Maya called themselves Qucumatz because “they said that there was salvation only in the water” (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 59). Gagavitz, a legendary ancestor of the Cakchiquels, transformed himself into Qucumatz by throwing himself into a lake, thus causing a storm to agitate the water and form a whirlpool (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 76). Nuñez de la Vega wrote that the Quichés believed that Qucumatz is a serpent with feathers that moves in the water (Recinos 1950, 81 n. 2). The ancient Maya generally associated standing water with the underworld. Thus, the god Quetzal Serpent combines the contrasting powers of a celestial bird with a terrestrial serpent, the darkness of deep waters with the light of the upper world. Thus he transcends all levels of existence. 55 The räxon (Cotinga amabilis), commonly known as the Lovely Cotinga, is a dovelike tropical bird with turquoise-blue plumage and a purple breast and throat. According to the Annals of the Cakchiquels, the highly prized feathers of the Lovely Cotinga were given as tribute by the Cakchiquel clans to the lords of Tulan in the East (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 48). 56 U K'ux Kaj (Heart of Sky—also called Huracan, cf. p. 70; lines 183-189), appears to be the principal god in the Popol Vuh account. He is the only deity to appear in every phase of the creation, as well as throughout the mythologic and historical portions of the text. K'ux refers to the heart as the source of the “vital spirit” of a thing, or that which gives it life. According to Coto’s dictionary, it is also believed to be the center of thought and imagination. This deity, therefore, combines the powers of life and creativity, which are believed to exist in the midst of the heavens. During each creative period, Heart of Sky is the deity who first conceives the idea of what is to be formed. Other deities then carry out his will by giving it material expression. 57 K'ab'awil (god) refers to the general concept of deity in the Popol Vuh. The word is used to refer to ancient gods such as Heart of Sky, as well as to the wood or stone effigies carved to represent them. Soon after the Spanish conquest, Dominicans chose the word k'ab'awil to refer to the Christian “God.” Franciscans, on the other hand, rejected this usage of the word because of its earlier association with Precolumbian religion. This difference was a frequent point of contention between the two missionary orders during the early Colonial Period. 58 lines 155-274 59 Literally “they found themselves.” bringing together their words and their thoughts.60 Then they gave birth, heartening one another. Beneath the light, they gave birth to humanity. Then they arranged for the germination and creation61 of the trees and the bushes, the germination of all life and creation, in the darkness and in the night, by Heart of Sky, who is called Huracan.62 First is Thunderbolt Huracan, second is Youngest Thunderbolt,63 and third is Sudden Thunderbolt.64 These three together are Heart of Sky.65 Then they came together with Sovereign and Quetzal Serpent. Together they conceived light and life: 60 The creation is described as a unified effort by a number of gods, all acting in concert with one another after careful deliberation and planning. None can act alone without the direction and assistance of other deities. In Quiché society, lack of unity is seen as one of the chief causes of misfortune and failure. Disagreements are therefore quickly resolved through direct discussion or mediation by a respected elder. 61 Winaqirik. The root of this verb is winaq (people), making it something like “to people.” It is used however, to refer to the creation not only of humanity, but the earth, vegetation, animals, etc. Tedlock translates it as “generation” (D. Tedlock 1996, 65). 62 The etymology of this god’s name is too complex and obscure to give a definitive translation. In its simplest interpretation, Juraqan means “One Leg.” Belief in a one-legged god was widespread throughout Precolumbian Mesoamerica. An important example was the Maya god K'awil (God GII of the Palenque Triad, who was often depicted with one anthropomorphic foot and the other a serpent), associated with kingship and the sky. Raqan, however, may also refer to the length or height of an object. The following line uses the name to refer to a bolt of lightning as a long flash of light. Coto interprets raqan as something “long or gigantic in size.” According to Dennis Tedlock’s Quiché collaborators, “leg” may also be used as a means of counting animate things, in the same way that we refer to the counting of “head” of cattle. “One Leg” might therefore mean “one of a kind” (D. Tedlock 1983a, 138). The god’s name would thus refer to his unique nature as the essential power of the sky. In addition, the homophonous word huracán was used along the Gulf Coast of Mexico and the West Indies to refer to powerful swirling winds. The modern English hurricane may be derived from the Taino version of this word (Recinos 1950, 83 n. 7; Hunt 1977, 242; D. Tedlock 1996, 223). This interpretation is consistent with the god’s nature as the “heart of the sky,” the eye of the hurricane forming the divine axis around which time and creation revolve in endless repetitive cycles of birth and destruction. 63 Ch'i'p refers to the youngest member of the family or the smallest member of a group. 64 Räxa (green, new, fresh, sudden). This is a sudden flash or bolt of lightning (Coto 1983, 479). It may also refer to the lightning’s ability to renew or regenerate. In Santiago Atitlán, traditionalists believe that it is lightning that splits open maize seeds to allow them to germinate and bear new life (Christenson 2001, 72-74, 134). 65 These three gods comprise the powers of the sky, symbolized by various aspects of the thunderbolt. Thunderstorms combine the elements of water (rain) and fire (lightning), which Quichés see as essential to all life. Lightning is also considered the force that fertilizes the earth and promotes the growth of crops. In modern Quiché society, lightning is believed to be the inspirational force of the sky. Modern aj q'ij priests take note of sensations within their bodies, which they call “lightning in the blood,” and interpret them as “How shall it be sown? When shall there be a dawn for anyone? Who shall be a provider?66 Who shall be a sustainer?67 “Then be it so. You are conceived. May the water be taken away, emptied out, so that the plate of the earth may be created—may it be gathered and become level. Then may it be sown; then may dawn the sky and the earth. There can be no worship, no reverence given by what we have framed and what we have shaped, until humanity has been created, until people have been made,” they said. Then the earth was created by them. Merely their word brought about the creation of it. In order to create the earth, they said, “Earth,” and immediately it was created. Just like a cloud, like a mist, was the creation and formation68 of it. Then they called forth the mountains from the water. Straightaway69 the great mountains came to be. It was merely their spirit essence,70 their miraculous power,71 that revelatory messages (B. Tedlock 1982, 133-147). Although Quiché gods are normally named in pairs, there are occasional appearances of a trinity, as in this case. The principal gods of the three ruling Quiché lineages were Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz (see p. 223). Quiché temples generally had three entrances (for reconstruction drawings of such temples, see Carmack 1981, 270, 273). The idea of a trinity in Maya cosmology may be very ancient. The largest of the Maya centers built prior to the birth of Christ was El Mirador, located in the central Petén rain forest of Guatemala. Characteristic of its temples was a unique triadic pattern consisting of huge platforms, each surmounted by three pyramids. 66 Tzuqul is a provider of any kind, although generally in the sense of food. Barbara Tedlock notes that one of the names for priest-shamans in Momostenango is tzuqunel (feeder) because he symbolically “feeds” the Mundo [Spanish “World,” the principal earth deity] and his own ancestors with their ceremonies (B. Tedlock 1982, 114). A fundamental aspect of indigenous highland Maya religion is the belief that human beings stand as essential mediators between this world and that of their patron deities and ancestors. Sacred ritual, performed at the proper time and in a manner established by ancient precedent, is necessary to maintain this link or all creation runs the risk of collapse. 67 Q'o'l is one who provides sustenance, primarily in the form of nourishment, but also nurtures in any other way, such as a mother caring for an infant. 68 There is no English equivalent for the verb pupuje'ik. According to the colonial era dictionary compiled by Fr. Domingo de Basseta, the word means “the way in which clouds rise up from mountains.” 69 Ju suk'. Basseta translates this as “quickly, instantly.” It literally means “one straight,” somewhat like our English phrases “straightaway,” or “directly.” brought about the conception of the mountains and the valleys.72 Straightaway were created cypress groves and pine forests to cover the face of the earth. Thus Quetzal Serpent rejoiced: “It is good that you have come, Heart of Sky—you, Huracan, and you as well, Youngest Thunderbolt and Sudden Thunderbolt. That which we have framed and shaped shall turn out well,” they said. First the earth was created, the mountains and the valleys. The waterways were divided, their branches coursing among the mountains. Thus the waters were divided, revealing the great mountains. For thus was the creation of the earth, created then by Heart of Sky and Heart of Earth, as they are called. They were the first to conceive it. The 70 Nawal also has no English equivalent. In Quiché theology, all things, both living and inanimate, have a spirit essence which they call nawal. This spirit essence is believed to give them power to act or communicate on a supernatural plane, for example, to transform their usual form into that of a powerful animal or force of nature. Father Coto ascribes this power to the devil, defining the word naual as “the magical means whereby the devil spoke to the Quichés through their idols. Thus they would say that the life of the tree, the life of the stone, of the hill, is its naual, because they believed there was life in these objects. If a man asks his wife for something to eat or drink when there is nothing in the house, the wife would reply, xa pe ri tin naualih? (Do you expect me to perform miracles?)” (Coto 1983, 328, 369). Although nawal is borrowed from the Nahua language, where it means “to transform” (Campbell 1983, 84), the Quiché interpretation of the word is derived from the root na', meaning “to feel” or “to know.” Thus the creation took place by means of the power of the gods’ spirit essence or divine knowledge rather than by physical action. 71 Pus is a loan word from ancient Mixe-Zoque (Campbell 1983, 83), likely the language of the Olmecs who dominated the Gulf Coast region from ca. 1500-400 BC. It refers to the cutting of flesh, and specifically to the practice of human sacrifice. In Colonial period Quiché texts, the word is often paired with the word nawal to describe the supernatural power of deities to accomplish what ordinary humans cannot. In the first years after the Spanish conquest, Roman Catholic missionaries adopted the word to describe the power of the Christian God to forgive sins and offer his body as a sacrament (Coto 1983, 424). This use of the word was soon abandoned, however, because of the word’s association with ancient Maya gods and their ceremonies. Father Coto thus defines pus as “magic, enchantment, necromancy, or witchcraft,” thereby associating the people’s belief in the power of the Quiché gods with evil and sorcery (Coto 1983, 74, 180, 328, 369). 72 Juyub'-Taq'aj (Mountain-Plain) is an example of merismus, the expression of a broad concept by a pair of complementary elements that are narrower in scope. This pairing is commonly used among present.day Quichés to refer to the earth as a whole. This not only comprises the physical contrast of elevations versus valleys, but also the notion of wilderness versus cultivated land (Cook 2000, 75). sky was set apart. The earth also was set apart within the waters. Thus was conceived the successful completion of the work when they thought and when they pondered. THE CREATION OF THE ANIMALS73 THEN were conceived the animals of the mountains, the guardians of the forest,74 and all that populate the mountains—the deer75 and the birds, the puma76 and the jaguar,77 the serpent78 and the rattlesnake,79 the pit viper80 and the guardian of the bushes. She Who Has Borne Children and He Who Has Begotten Sons then asked: “Shall it be merely solitary, merely silent beneath the trees and the bushes? It is well that there shall be guardians for them,” they said. Thus they considered and spoke together, and immediately were created the deer and the birds. Having done this, they then provided homes for the deer and the birds: 73 lines 275-339 74 Quichés believe that the wild animals of the forest serve as guardians and caretakers for the god of the earth, who is usually referred to as Juyub'-Taq'aj (Mountain-Plain) or Dios Mundo (Spanish for “God Earth). He is often described as a kindly, old, white-haired man who lives in the uninhabited forests. When hunting deer, drinking from a mountain stream, or clearing a field for planting crops, permission must first be obtained from the earth god and appropriate payment made in the form of prayers and offerings. If the proper offerings are not made, the earth god might send one of his wild animals to attack the ungrateful person or to raid his property. 75 Most likely the white-tailed deer (Odocoileus americana toltecus). 76 The Central American mountain lion or cougar (Felis concolor). 77 Panthera onza. 78 This may refer to the boa constrictor (Constrictor constrictor) or the venomous bushmaster (Lechesis muta). 79 Crotalus durissus. 80 K'an Ti' (Yucatec or Cholan: “Yellow Mouth”) is a pit viper, likely the cantil or fer-de-lance (Trigonocephalus specialis), which is extremely poisonous (Cook 2000, 166). Its name is perhaps derived from the yellow markings around the mouth of the fer-de-lance (D. Tedlock 1996, 228 n. 66). Basseta records that it may be any venomous serpent and lists specifically the coral snake. I have used pit viper which covers the range of venomous vipers living in the Maya region. “You, deer, will sleep along the courses of rivers and in the canyons. Here you will be in the meadows and in the orchards. In the forests you shall multiply. You will walk on all fours, and thus you will be able to stand,” they were told. Then they established the homes of the birds, both small and great. “You, birds, you will make your homes and your houses in the tops of trees, and in the tops of bushes. There you will multiply and increase in numbers in the branches of the trees and the bushes,” the deer and the birds were told. When this had been done, all of them received their places to sleep and their places to rest. Homes were provided for the animals on the earth81 by She Who Has Borne Children and He Who Has Begotten Sons. Thus all was completed for the deer and the birds. THE FALL OF THE ANIMALS82 THEN it was said to the deer and the birds by the Framer and the Shaper, She Who Has Borne Children and He Who Has Begotten Sons: “Speak! Call! Don't moan or cry out. Speak to one another, each according to your kind, according to your group,” they were told—the deer, the birds, the pumas, the jaguars, and the serpents. “Speak therefore our names. Worship83 us, for we are your Mother and your Father. Say this, therefore: ‘Huracan, Youngest Thunderbolt, and Sudden Thunderbolt, 81 No animals other than the deer and birds are mentioned as having received their homes and sleeping places. Thus the deer and birds represent all the animals of the earth, indicating their symbolic importance as the primary guardians of earth and sky. 82 lines 340-433 Heart of Sky and Heart of Earth, Framer and Shaper, She Who Has Borne Children and He Who Has Begotten Sons.’ Speak! Call upon us! Worship us!” they were told. But they did not succeed. They did not speak like people. They only squawked and chattered and roared. Their speech was unrecognizable,84 for each cried out in a different way. When they heard this,85 the Framer and the Shaper said, “Their speech did not turn out well.” And again they said to each other: “They were not able to speak our names. We are their Framer and their Shaper. This is not good,” said She Who Has Borne Children and He Who Has Begotten Sons to each other. They were therefore told: “You shall be replaced because you were not successful. You could not speak. We have therefore changed our word. Your food and your sustenance, your sleeping places and your places to rest, that which belonged to you, shall be in the canyons and the forests. “Nevertheless, because you have not been able to worship us or call upon us, there will yet be someone else who may be a worshiper. We shall now make one who 83 Q'ijarisaj (to worship) is derived from the root q'ij (day or sun) in a transitive imperative verb form (cause to be). If such a word existed in English, it might be something like “dayify” (to honor their day, perhaps through calendric ceremonies) or “sunify” (to glorify the gods like the glory of the sun). The gods’ purpose in carrying out the creation seems to be to provide beings who will be able to speak intelligibly. Only in this way could the gods be worshiped properly—through the articulation of their names with human speech. Page 80 (lines 534-535) emphasizes that “words” are the gods’ support. 84 Literally “not appeared its face their speech.” 85 Literally “try again their day.” Q'ij (day, sun) has a host of associated meanings. As Barbara Tedlock writes, “each day has ‘its face,’ its identity, its character, that influences its events; a person’s luck of the moment, or even his fate in general, is called ‘the face of his day’ (B. Tedlock 1982, 2). will give honor. Your calling will merely be to have your flesh eaten. Thus be it so. This must be your service,”86 they were told. Thus were commanded the animals, both small and great, that were upon the face of the earth. Then they wanted to test again their fate. They wanted to make another attempt. They wanted to try again to arrange87 for those who would worship them. The speech of the animals could not be understood. Because of the way they were made, they were not successful.88 Therefore their flesh was brought low. They were made to serve. The animals that were on the face of the earth were eaten and killed. THE CREATION OF THE MUD PERSON89 THUS there was another attempt to frame and shape man by the Framer and the Shaper, by She Who Has Borne Children and He Who Has Begotten Sons: “Let us try again before the first sowing, before the dawn approaches. Let us make a provider, a sustainer for us. How shall we then be called upon so that we are remembered upon the face of the earth? We have already made a first attempt with what we have framed and what we have shaped. But we were not successful in being worshiped or in being revered by them. Thus, let us try again to make one who will honor us, who will respect us; one who will be a provider and a sustainer,” they said. 86 Patan in this context is a required service, the same word being used for tribute payments. 87 Nuk' is to arrange for something, but it also means “to experiment or test,” implying a level of uncertainty that matches the previous two phrases, forming a triplet. 88 The principal reason for the downfall of the first created beings was their inability to communicate in human speech, so the gods could not be worshiped with intelligible words. Each subsequent unsuccessful creation will be destroyed for the same reason. 89 lines 434-517 Then was the framing, the making of it. Of earth and mud was its flesh composed. But they saw that it was still not good. It merely came undone and crumbled. It merely became sodden and mushy.90 It merely fell apart and dissolved. Its head was not set apart properly.91 Its face could only look in one direction. Its face was hidden. Neither could it look about. At first it spoke, but without knowledge.92 Straightaway it would merely dissolve in water, for it was not strong. Then said the Framer and the Shaper: “We have made a mistake; thus let this be merely a mistake.93 It cannot walk, neither can it multiply. Then let it be so. Let it be merely left behind as a thing of no importance,”94 they said. Therefore they undid it. They toppled what they had framed, what they had shaped. Then they said again: “How then will we truly make that which may succeed and bear fruit; that will worship us and that will call upon us?” they asked. Then they thought again: 90 Lub'anik refers to vegetables that have been boiled so long they have become soft and mushy. 91 The fact that the head was not placed apart from the body indicates that it did not have a neck with which to turn its head. 92 When the first Spanish missionaries arrived among the Maya they vigorously suppressed Precolumbian documents such as the Popol Vuh and replaced them with doctrinal treatises based on the Bible. Many of these, such as the Theologia Indorum by Domingo de Vico, stressed the creation account of Genesis. I can’t help but wonder if the first Maya to hear these sermons found it strangely logical that these foreign priests, who burned their books and did not speak their language, were declared to be “formed from the dust of the ground,” made soft by a mist that “watered the whole face of the ground” (Genesis 2:6-7). Did the Maya think, “Ah, they’re mud people. They speak but without knowledge and understanding.” 93 Lab'e is a “mistake, fault, defect, deformed child, or monster.” It is also used to indicate a bad omen. 94 According to Coto, na'oj chi ri' means “leave behind; of little importance.” “We shall merely tell Xpiyacoc and Xmucane, Hunahpu Possum and Hunahpu Coyote, ‘Try again a divination,95 a shaping,’” said the Framer and the Shaper to each other. Then they called upon Xpiyacoc and Xmucane, and in this manner were the seers96 addressed: “Grandmother of Day, Grandmother of Light!” In this way, they were addressed by the Framer and the Shaper, for these are the names of Xpiyacoc and Xmucane. THE CREATION OF THE EFFIGIES OF CARVED WOOD97 HURACAN, along with Sovereign and Quetzal Serpent, then spoke to the Master of Days98 and the Mistress of Shaping, they who are seers: “It shall be found; it shall be discovered how we are to create shaped and framed people who will be our providers and sustainers. May we be called upon, and may we be remembered. For it is with words that we are sustained, O Midwife and Patriarch, our Grandmother and our Grandfather, Xpiyacoc and Xmucane. Thus may it be spoken. May 95 Q'ijixik, which might be translated “dayification,” refers to a divinatory ceremony in which a handful of tz'ite beans or grains of maize (cf. 573-574) are cast and then interpreted by a sequential counting of the days of the Quiché ritual calendar. Thus the outcome of the creation is to be ritually determined through a divinatory “counting of days.” This practice was apparently widespread in ancient Mesoamerica. The Codex Borbonicus from Central Mexico depicts two aged deities casting seeds of maize or tz'ite in a divinatory ceremony (folio 21). Calendar divination is still a common practice among the highland Maya. 96 According to Basseta, nicvachinel refers to a “soothsayer, diviner, fortuneteller,” based on the root verb nicoh (to see, or look ahead). Coto adds that a niq vachinel is one who sees well, or divines by means of lots, which, in fact, Xpiyacoc and Xmucane practice on pp. 81-82 (lines 583-623). The implication is that Xpiyacoc and Xmucane were able to see with divine foresight.97 lines 518-679 98 Aj q'ij is still the title used by Quiché priests who divine the will of deity through a ritual counting of the days in the sacred calendar. The title means literally “he/she of days,” or “master of days,” although modern ethnographers often refer to them as “daykeepers.” Because Xmucane and Xpiyacoc assisted in the creation of the universe at the beginning of time, thus setting in motion the endless cycles of day and night, birth and death, sowing and harvest, they stand as the ideal interpreters through divination of these cycles. it be sown. May it dawn so that we are called upon and supported, so that we are remembered by framed and shaped people, by effigies99 and forms100 of people. Hearken and let it be so. “Reveal your names, Hunahpu Possum and Hunahpu Coyote, Great She Who Has Borne Children and Great He Who Has Begotten Sons, Great Peccary and Great Coati, Jeweler and Worker in Precious Stones, Sculptor and Wood Worker, Creator of the Green Earth and Creator of the Blue Sky, Incense101 Maker and Master Artist,102 99 Poy is any type of created image that resembles a human— an effigy, doll, manikin, scarecrow, etc. 100 According to Basseta, anom is something that is created in the image of something else, a “model or form,” often made by means of a mould. It is also used to refer to a “fool, buffoon, or someone who is lightminded and unserious.” These words presage the falseness and lack of intelligence characteristic of the wooden effigies that are soon to be created. 101 Q'ol. This is tree sap, the most common source of incense among the Maya. This word most commonly refers to pine resin incense, although it may be used for other types as well. 102 The Quiché title Aj Toltecat is given to anyone who is highly skilled in art, science, religion, and creative endeavors in general. Toltecat refers specifically to the ancient Toltecs, who, under the legendary priest-ruler Topiltzin Quetzalcoatl, founded the city of Tula in Central Mexico in the tenth century a.d. Although the city fell some two centuries later, the fame of its people was passed from generation to generation, undoubtedly embellished significantly with each retelling. At the time of the Spanish conquest, the ancient Toltecs had achieved an almost mythic reputation as masters in all the arts. The Aztecs gave the following description in folio 172v of the Codex Matritensis: The Toltecs were a skillful people; all of their works were good, all were exact, all well made and admirable. Their houses were beautiful, with turquoise mosaics, the walls finished with plaster, clean and marvelous houses, which is to say Toltec houses, beautifully made, beautiful in everything... Painters, sculptors, carvers of precious stones, feather artists, potters, spinners, weavers, skillful in all they made.... The Toltecs were truly wise; they conversed with their own hearts.... They played their drums and rattles; They were singers, they composed songs and sang them among the people; Grandmother of Day and Grandmother of Light. Thus shall you all be called by that which we shall frame and shape. Cast103 grains of maize and tz'ite104 to divine how what we shall make will come out when we grind and chisel out its mouth and face in wood,”105 so it was said to the Masters of Days. Thus began the divination ceremony, the casting of grains of maize and of tz'ite, the revelation of days and of shaping. Then spoke the one Grandmother and the one Grandfather to them. For this was the Grandfather, the Master of the Tz'ite, Xpiyacoc by name. And this was the Grandmother, the Mistress of Days106 and Mistress of Shaping who is at the foot,107 who is called Xmucane. Thus they began to speak, to carry out their divination ceremony: “May it be discovered. May it be found. Say it! Our ears hear you. Speak! Tell it! May the tree be found that is to be carved and chiseled out by the Framer and the Shaper. They guarded the songs in their memories, they deified them in their hearts. (León-Portilla 1980, 207) 103 Mala' (to cast) refers not only to the scattering of the grains of maize or tz'ite, but also to the act of gently passing the hand over the pile of grains to mix them prior to their use in divination ceremonies (for a description of this ceremony see Schultze-Jena 1954; B. Tedlock 1982). 104 Tz'ite is the bright-red beanlike seed of the coral tree (Spanish: palo de pito tree; Erythrina corallodendron). The seeds are used in divination ceremonies. Just as in the Popol Vuh manuscript, modern Quiché aj q'ij priests may use maize kernels or tz'ite seeds for such divinations. Tz'ite seeds are often referred to metaphorically as maize as well (Schultze-Jena 1954, 84; B. Tedlock 1982, 84). 105 Each of the first three creative attempts used a different class of material—animal (wild beasts and birds), mineral (mud), and vegetable (wood). 106 In Momostenango the ideal is for married couples to act as the agents in such ceremonies, similar to the tradition of Xpiyacoc and Xmucane (B. Tedlock 1982, 85). 107 Chi raqan may mean either “at the foot” or “at the leg” since the Quiché language does not distinguish between the foot and the leg. Although Dennis Tedlock translates this phrase somewhat inaccurately as “who stands behind others,” I agree with his interpretation that Xmucane in her role as a female aj q'ij (daykeeper) positions herself at the feet of the petitioner so as to give assistance “as a daykeeper does when praying and giving offerings on behalf of a client, or a midwife does when assisting a birth” (D. Tedlock 1996, 234 n. 70). If this is to be the provider and the sustainer, then may it now be sown that the dawn may come. You, grains of maize, and you, tz'ite; you, days, and you, the shaping—you are called,108 you are summoned.”109 Thus it was said110 to the grains of maize and the tz'ite, to the days and the shaping. “Bring it to a conclusion, 111 O Heart of Sky. Do not punish them further.112 Do not cause any more suffering for Sovereign and Quetzal Serpent,” they said. Then they spoke straight to the point:113 “May these effigies of wood come out well. May they speak. May they communicate there upon the face of the earth. May it be so,” they said. 108 According to Basseta, chokonik refers to “calling,” in the sense of being called upon to carry out an errand. 109 Taqentaj is “to be summoned, commissioned, dispatched, given a task to fulfill, or be sent out as a messenger.” 110 Modern aj q'ij priests also speak directly to the tz'ite as they carry out their divinatory ceremonies, urging them to give an accurate and true answer to their petition. 111 K'ix is “to complete, finish, conclude, or come to a solution” (Varea). As a noun, the word refers to a thorn, spine, or insect sting. When used as a verb, it is one of the words used to describe drawing blood in auto-sacrificial ceremonies. In this passage, it is possible that both meanings are intended. In Mesoamerican theology, gods of the creation often sacrifice themselves in order to provide the sacred blood necessary to produce new life. 112 The phrase mak'ajisaj u chi', u wach (don’t grind up his mouth, his face) is a common expression meaning something like “don’t punish him” or “don’t teach him a hard lesson.” Heart of Sky is thus being counseled not to cause Sovereign and Quetzal Serpent any more grief with further failures to successfully create beings who can worship and support them. Perhaps a bit of frustration at the gods’ lack of success up to this point is evident in this address by Xpiyacoc and Xmucane to Heart of Sky. The Quichés are known for their directness in prayer. When a perceived injustice takes place in the life of a petitioner, he/she may well complain directly to the god who has responsibility for that malady and insist bluntly that things be made right. Bunzel suggests that Quiché deities are generally neutral entities, and thus “subject to bribery, cajolery and threats” (Bunzel 1952, 267). I heard one farmer bitterly accuse the earth god of taking a tool of his, even though the man had made all the appropriate offerings, and demand that it be returned immediately. Modern aj q'ij priests repeatedly admonish the gods to tell the truth and not b'an tzij (make words or lie). 113 Literally “they spoke its straightness.” And when they had spoken, straightaway the effigies114 of carved wood were made. They had the appearance of people and spoke like people as well. They populated the whole face of the earth. The effigies of carved wood began to multiply, bearing daughters and sons. Nevertheless, they still did not possess their hearts nor their minds. They did not remember their Framer or their Shaper.115 They walked without purpose.116 They crawled on their hands and knees and did not remember Heart of Sky. Thus they were weighed in the balance. They were merely an experiment, an attempt at people. At first they spoke, but their faces were all dried up. Their legs and arms were not filled out. They had no blood or blood flow117 within them. They had no sweat or oil. Their cheeks were dry, and their faces were masks.118 Their legs and arms were stiff. Their bodies were rigid.119 Thus they were not capable of understanding120 before their Framer and their Shaper, those 114 Poy refers to any effigy fashioned in the likeness of a human, such as a doll or scarecrow. Tedlock translates the word as “manikin,” Recinos as “figure,” and Edmonson as “doll.” 115 Again, the cause of the downfall of this attempt at humanity is their failure to remember the gods and thus worship them properly. 116 According to Basseta, xaloq' is something “without cause, without purpose, in vain.” Tedlock’s Quiché collaborator remarked that this phrase indicates that the wooden effigies were “like animals,” because humans must ask permission of the gods to travel any significant distance (D. Tedlock 1996, 234, n. 70). 117 The text lists two parallel words here, kik'el and komajil, both of which mean “blood.” Basseta mentions that komaj may specifically refer to menstruation, or menstrual blood flow. 118 Quichés consider the face to be the symbol for the personality or essence of a person. The fact that the wooden effigies had masks rather than faces implies that they were false by nature. 119 The word yeyoj means both “rigid” as well as “stubborn.” 120 Na'wik. This is the capacity to understand, notice, observe, perceive. Thus it is the wooden effigies’ inability to learn and grow in knowledge that destroys them. Na'b'al (understanding, knowledge, memory) is a uniquely human trait. A resident of Santiago Chimaltenango noted that even a newborn baby has naab'l. But although animals may have a kind of awareness, they lack naab'l (Watanabe 1992, 82). Watanabe suggests that the notion of naab'l includes the larger concepts of soul, socialization, learning, and conventions of Chimalteco morality (Ibid., 100). Thus, the effigies of wood lack the essential awareness, who had given them birth and given them hearts. They were the first numerous people who have lived here upon the face of the earth. THE FALL OF THE EFFIGIES OF CARVED WOOD121 THEN came the end of the effigies carved of wood, for they were ruined, crushed,122 and killed. A flood was planned by Heart of Sky that came down upon the heads of the effigies carved of wood.123 The body of man had been carved of tz'ite wood124 by the Framer and the Shaper. The body of woman consisted of reeds125 according to the desire of the Framer and the and understanding that are characteristic of human beings. In this sense, they are like the animals who were not able to remember or honor the gods properly and were thus destroyed. 121 lines 680-837 122 Q'utuxik is “to be crushed or pulverized,” generally with reference to dried vegetables like chili peppers. 123 The destruction of the earth by flood prior to our present age was a widespread tradition in Mesoamerica: “There was among them information of the flood and of the end of the world, and they called it Butic, which is the word which means flood of many waters and means ‘judgment,’ and so they believe that another Butic is about to come, which is another flood and judgment, not of water, but of fire, which they say would be the end of the world, in which all the creatures would reprove, especially those which serve man, like the stones on which they grind their corn and wheat, the pots, the vessels, giving to understand that they will turn against man, and that the moon and sun would be eclipsed, saying that they would be eaten” (Las Casas 1967, III.ccxxxv.507; cf. III.cxxiv.650. Translation by author). The Yucatec Maya Book of Chilam Balam of Chumayel records that the people of that age “were buried in the sand at the shore of the sea, in the waves. Then in a great sheet of water the waves came. When the great serpent was taken away, the heavens fell and the earth was submerged” (León-Portilla 1969, 50; cf. Roys 1967, 170). Aztec tradition also has the inhabitants of the fourth age of the earth destroyed by flood: “These are those who lived in the fourth Sun, called 4-Water. They lived 676 years, until they were destroyed. They were swallowed up by the waters and became fish. The heavens collapsed upon them and in a single day they perished” (Velázquez 1945, 119-120). Although the Popol Vuh has the wooden effigies destroyed in a flood (see also p. 85; lines 706-709, 728-731), lines 710-723 have them crushed and devoured by monstrous beasts, while lines 736-823 describe their ruin at the hands of their own domesticated animals, grinding stones, utensils, and other possessions. 124 In highland Guatemala, the wood of the tz'ite (coral tree) is still considered to have extraordinary power, including the ability to speak (Orellana 1984, 98). In the Tz'utujil-Maya village of Santiago Atitlán, traditionalists venerate an effigy carved of tz'ite wood that they call Maximon (Ancient One Who Is Bound) or alternatively Mam (Ancient One). The trunk of this effigy is approximately 2.5 feet in height and 6-8 inches thick, with separate pieces of wood attached to form the head and legs. A carved mask with a roughly hewn face is tied about the head (cf. p. 84; lines 668-669). This effigy is said to be more ancient Shaper. But they were not capable of understanding and did not speak before their Framer and their Shaper, their makers and their creators. Thus they were killed in the flood. There came a great resin down from the sky.126 There came the ones called Chiselers of Faces, who gouged out their eyes.127 There came Death Knives,128 which cut off their heads. There came Crouching129 Jaguar, who ate their flesh. There came Striking130 Jaguar, who struck them. They smashed their bones and their tendons.131 Their bones were ground up. They were broken into pieces. Their faces were ground up132 because they proved to be incapable of understanding before the face of their mother and the face of their father, Heart of Sky, Huracan by name.133 than Christ, having been created “in the beginning of time, or of the world” (Mendelson 1959, 58, 60). Maximon is considered old and often malignant, standing in opposition to the established order of the community. He is thus associated with forgetfulness (B. Tedlock 1982, 101; cf. p. 83; lines 652-653, 656.657), hunger, sterility, sexual depravity (Thompson 1970, 299; Mendelson 1958b, 9), and opposition to life deities. He is particularly prominent during Easter celebrations, in which he presides over the death and entombment of Jesus Christ (Mendelson 1959, 1965; Tarn and Prechtel 1997; Christenson 2001, 176-191). The Maximon figure may be a remembrance of the chaotic world prior to the creation of humankind, when the gods were not remembered or worshiped properly by effigies carved from tz'ite wood. Cook suggests that Maximon’s opposition to Christ represents a kind of  “underground survival of powers from earlier, superseded epochs” (Cook 2000, 139-140). 125 This is the type of reed commonly used for weaving mats in Guatemala (Typha angustifolia). 126 Some confusion appears in the text as to the nature of the flood that destroyed the wooden effigies. Here the flood is composed of resin, sap, or turpentine (secretions of pine trees). Page 87 (lines 728-731) however describes a watery flood caused by heavy rainfall. 127 U b'aq' u wach (its seed his/her face) refers to the eyes. 128 Lotz is a knife used in butchering or surgery, although the word may also refer to the act of cutting flesh. 129 “Crouching,” as if lying in ambush. 130 Tukuj is “to strike something violently, with the intention of breaking it.” 131 Ib'och'il may refer to “tendons, blood vessels, or nerves.” I have chosen “tendons” because this word best parallels bones as a stiff supporting structure of the body. 132 To “grind someone’s face” is a metaphor for inflicting punishment. Thus they caused the face of the earth to be darkened, and there fell a black rain,134 a rain that fell both day and night. The small and the great animals came in upon them.135 Their faces were crushed by the trees and the stones. They were spoken to by all their maize grinders and their cooking griddles,136 their plates and their pots, their dogs137 and their grinding stones.138 However many things they had, all of them crushed their faces. Their dogs and their turkeys139 said to them: “Pain you have caused us. You ate us. Therefore it will be you that we will eat now.” 133 The violent destruction of the wooden effigies is perhaps commemorated in the dismemberment of the Maximon figure at Santiago Atitlán (see previous note on the tz'ite-wood figures). Maximon is a figure of carved tz'ite-wood prominently displayed at times of crisis, such as during the death of Christ at Easter or at harvest time, when the crops are ceremonially “killed.” When Christ rose from the dead and life restored to the world at the climax of such festivals, Maximon was ritually defeated by disassembling the wooden pieces of his body, removing his mask, and placing it upside down so that he cannot harm anyone and so that he will be left “without power of speech” (Mendelson 1965, 123). In other highland Maya communities, figures representing Maximon are torn apart, hung from trees, or burned. I saw one particularly evil-looking Maximon near the town of Sololá slashed repeatedly with a machete and thrown out onto a highway so that cars and buses would run over it. 134 “Black” in the sense that the storm was so severe that the sky was darkened with clouds. 135 The implication is that the wild animals of the mountains entered into the houses of the wooden effigies. The Quichés believe that when a wild animal enters their home it is to deliver a message from the earth god, who is the master of the animals. In this case, the message is a foreshadowing of the destruction that is soon to come upon the wooden effigies. 136 Xot (griddle) is a round, flat clay piece upon which tortillas or slices of steamed maize dough are cooked. 137 There were very few domesticated animals in Precolumbian Mesoamerica. Those that have been documented are the dog, turkey, and honeybee. The dog mentioned here is a small, fat, nearly hairless variety that does not bark and that was eaten in addition to being kept as a pet. 138 This is the metate, upon which maize and other grains are ground. It is usually made from a single block of heavy volcanic stone, quadrangular in shape, and supported by three short stone legs. 139 In modern Quiché usage, ak' refers to chickens, which were introduced by the Spaniards soon after the Conquest. The Precolumbian ak' was the domesticated turkey (Meleagris ocellata). Colonial period dictionaries often refer to the turkey as kitzih ak' (true ak') to distinguish it from the chicken introduced from Europe. The dog and turkey together represent those domesticated animals raised by the Quichés and thus under their direct care and supervision. The wooden effigies thus reaped the vengeance of their own animals as a result of their cruelty and thoughtlessness. Then the grinding stones said this to them: “We were ground upon by you. Every day, every day, in the evening and at dawn, always you did holi, holi, huki, huki140 on our faces. This was our service for you who were the first people. But this day you shall feel our strength. We shall grind you like maize. We shall grind up your flesh,”141 said their grinding stones to them. Then their dogs said this to them: “Why was it that you didn’t give us our food? All we did was look at you, and you chased us away. You threw us out. You raised sticks against us to beat us while you ate.142 Thus you have spoken to us.143 We could not speak; therefore we received nothing from you. How could you not have understood this?144 You did understand. We were forgotten because of you. This day, therefore, you shall try the teeth that are in our mouths. We shall eat you,” said the dogs to them. Thus their faces were crushed. 140 The phrase holi, holi, huqui, huqui has been translated in a variety of ways in the past. Raynaud translates it as “strip, strip, tear, tear.” Edmonson interprets it as “Crunch, crunch! Scrape, scrape!” Tedlock uses “R-r-rip, r-r-rip, r-r-rub, r-r-rub.” Juk'i may, in fact, be translated “scrape” or “rub,” but jol has no relevant meaning in this passage. I have chosen to leave the phrase untranslated, because I believe the authors intended the words to convey the sound that is produced when maize is ground on a metate stone. The initial h of each of the words is pronounced harshly, like a Spanish j or a German ch, creating a coarse sound remarkably like that of stone scraping rhythmically against stone. 141 It is poetic justice that each of the household possessions of the wooden effigies chose to punish their owners with the same torments that they had suffered previously at their hands. Thus the grinding stones grind the faces of the wooden people in the same way that their own faces had been ground upon day in and day out (p. 87; lines 767-769). The dogs who had been eaten now eat their masters (p. 88; lines 784-789). The griddles and pots, which had been placed on the fire each day, now throw their owners into the fire to be burned (p. 88; lines 799-800). The stone tools and hearthstones pound the heads of the wooden effigies as they had been beaten upon (pp. 88-89; lines 800-807). 142 Even today domesticated dogs are often treated very carelessly among the Quichés. Most are emaciated and in constant fear of beatings and harsh words. 143 The purpose of the creation has been to create people who were capable of speech in order to sustain the gods. The dogs are pointing out that, instead, their speech has been limited to beatings and violence. Thus the wooden effigies have also failed in their purpose. 144 Na'wik is to “understand, know, notice, observe, or perceive.” Any of these might fit this context. Pages 84-86 (lines 673, 724-725) assert that it was the lack of ability in the wooden effigies to “understand” that condemned them. Then spoke also their griddles and their pots to them: “Pain you have caused us. Our mouths and our faces are sooty. You were forever throwing us upon the fire and burning us. Although we felt no pain, you now shall try it. We shall burn you,” said all of their pots. Thus their faces were all crushed. The stones of the hearth flattened them. They would come out from the fire, landing on their heads and causing them pain. They fled. They hurried away. They wanted to climb up on top of the houses, but the houses would fall apart beneath them and they were thrown off. They wanted to climb up to the tops of the trees, but the trees would not support them. They wanted to hide in caves, but the mouths of the caves closed up before their faces. Thus the framed people, the shaped people, were undone. They were demolished and overthrown as people. The mouths and the faces of all of them were ruined and crushed. It is said that the spider monkeys145 that are in the forest today are descendents146 of these people. This was their heritage because their flesh was merely wood when it was created by the Framer and the Shaper. Therefore the spider monkeys appear like people, descendents of one generation of framed and shaped people. But they were only effigies carved of wood. 145 K'oy refers to the spider monkey (Ateles vellerosus or Ateles geoffroyi). Central Mexican traditions are remarkably similar. The Anales de Cuauhtitlan relate the tradition that in the fourth age of the earth “people were turned into monkeys. They were scattered over the mountains, and the monkey-men lived there” (León-Portilla 1980, 138). 146 Etal is generally used to mean “sign, symbol, or manifestation.” Coto notes that it may also refer to “descendents, son, heritage, or succession.” The latter interpretation seems to fit the context better in this passage. THE PRIDE OF SEVEN MACAW BEFORE THE DAWN147 WHILE the face of the earth was only a little brightened,148 before there was a sun, there was one who puffed himself up149 named Seven Macaw.150 There was a sky and an earth, but the faces of the sun and moon were dim.151 He therefore declared himself to be the bright sign for those who were drowned in the flood.152 He was like an enchanted person in his essence. 147 lines 838-907 148 This translation is based on the Quiché word natatic, which refers to the first faint rays of light at dawn. Basseta likens it to the dim light cast by the moon. 149 Nimarisaj rib' (to aggrandise self) is a common Quiché expression for pride or boastfulness. The Popol Vuh repeatedly describes this as forbidden or evil (see for example pp. 94, 96; lines 915-916), and those who are guilty of it are severely punished under the direction of the god Heart of Sky. 150 The scarlet macaw (Ara macao) is a large species of parrot with beautiful, bright-red plumage. Seven Macaw is portrayed as a boastful individual whose ultimate downfall is ordained by Heart of Sky because of the excessive pride he had in his glorious appearance. 151 The verb moymot (dim) refers to something giving off a dim or shadowy light, such as a sputtering candle flame or the sky at twilight. 152 The account of Seven Macaw is set at the time prior to the flood that destroyed the wooden effigies, as described in the previous section (see also p. 93; lines 901-902). This episode may have political overtones as well. According to the Books of Chilam Balam the founder of Izamal, one of the principal Yucatec centers in the Postclassic period, was a semi-deified lord named Kenech Kukmo (Sun-faced/eyed Fire Macaw) (Roys 1967, 82, 141, 160 n. 2; Craine and Reindorp 1979, 83-84 n. 78). This lord was also the ancestor of a number of the principal lineages of Yucatán who worshiped him as a god. So important was this god/ruler that the Chilam Balam of Maní refers to him as the personification of all northern Yucatán (Craine and Reindorp 1979, 156). Cogolludo wrote of him: “They had another temple on another mount in the northern part of the city, and this, from the name of an idol which they worshiped here, they called Kinich Kakmo, which means the sun with a face. They say that the rays were of fire and descended at mid.day to consume the sacrifice, as the vacamaya flies through the air (which is a bird something like a parrot, though larger in size, and with finely colored feathers). They resorted to this idol in time of mortality, pestilence, or much sickness, both men and women, and brought many offerings. They say that at mid-day a fire descended and consumed the sacrifice in the sight of all. After this the priest replied to their inquires about the sickness, famine, or pestilence, and thus they learned their fate (Cogolludo 1957, IV.8.198; cited in Craine and Reindorp 1979, 83 n. 78). Izamal was eventually conquered by Kak-u-pacal (Fire His Shield) of Mayapan. Gaspar Antonio Chi wrote that “in course of time the inhabitants of the said town (Izamal) were conquered by Kak-u-pacal and a hundred valorous captains formerly of the town of Mayapan, and that those who founded this place were called Kinich-Kabul, Kinich Kakmo and others from whom descend the Xool, Mo and Coyi <families>, Indians so named in this province” (cited in Roys 1967, 160 n. 2). Mayapan is a good candidate for the Tulan mentioned in the Popol Vuh as the sacred city from which the ancestors of the Quiché rulers derived their authority to rule (pp. 210-213). Thus this account of the boastfulness of a sun-faced/eyed macaw who declared himself to be a sun and moon god, but who ultimately fell at the hands of the ancestors of the Quichés (who eventually became apotheosed as the true “I am great. I dwell above the heads of the people who have been framed and shaped. I am their sun. I am also their light. And I am also their moon.153 “Then be it so. Great is my brightness. By the brilliance of my silver and gold154 I light the walkways and pathways155 of the people. “My eyes sparkle with glittering blue/green jewels.156 My teeth as well are jade stones,157 as brilliant as the face of the sky. This, my beak, shines brightly far into the distance like the moon.158 sun and moon—see p. 191) may be a mythic recollection of this historical incident. It is perhaps significant as well that the conquest of Izamal was carried out by Kak-u-pacal (Fire His Shield), while the titular god of the Quichés, Tohil, was primarily a fire deity (pp. 213-217). In addition, the progenitors of the Quiché ruling lineages bore the title K'enech Ajaw (Sun-faced/eyed Lord—see p. 203n.505), the legitimate sun lords as opposed to the false sun of Seven Macaw. 153 Although the predominant emphasis in this passage is on the light of the sun and moon, the authors of the text apparently also meant to emphasize that Seven Macaw saw himself as the means of marking the passage of time. Q’ij means both sun and day; Ik'il may refer to the moon, but more often this form of the word refers to month. Calendrics are a vital part of highland Maya culture and ritual because passages of time are believed to be manifestations of deity. Notice that at the end of the chapter the authors refer to the “days and months” before the sun and moon could be seen. 154 Puwaq refers to any type of precious metal. In modern usage, the word requires a color modifier to determine its specific type—q'an puwaq (yellow precious metal) for gold or copper, saq puwaq (white precious metal) for silver, etc. In this case, Seven Macaw compares his brilliance to that of shiny metal. 155 B'inib'al (walkway) and the parallel word chakab'al (pathway) both end in the suffix -b'al, which indicates a facilitative object. The root of b'inib'al is b'inik (to walk); therefore, the word may refer to anything which facilitates the act of walking. This may be a well-cleared walkway, a walking stick, or a torch to illuminate one’s path in darkness. Chakab'al has a similar usage, although its root, chakanik, refers to the act of walking on all fours, or crawling. The same two verbs are used to describe the travel of animals (p. 74; lines 312-314), as well as that of the wooden effigies before their destruction in the flood (p. 83; lines 654-655). Tedlock’s collaborator, Andrés Xiloj, indicated that these two words “are in the prayers we say at the warabal ha [patrilineage shrines], to ask permission for anyone who goes out of the house to whatever place” (D. Tedlock 1985, 261). Seven Macaw is thus boasting that he stands as the only “way and light” for all creation in the darkness of the predawn world. 156 K'uwal may refer to any rare gemstone. It is derived from a root word meaning “to be hidden or covered up.” Colonial period dictionaries often give “emerald” as the specific definition of the word, and emerald appears to be the blue/green jewel described here. 157 Xit is the word for greenstone. Green or blue stones like jade, serpentine, nephrite, and turquoise were highly prized in ancient Mesoamerica, their value surpassing that of gold. Maya lords often decorated their teeth with jadeite or nephrite inlays as a token of their power and prestige. Such inlays were so meticulously carved and fitted into prepared incisor teeth that no significant gaps between tooth and stone are detectable. “My throne is gold and silver. When I go forth from my throne, I brighten the face of the earth. “Thus I am the sun. I am the moon as well for those who are born in the light, those who are begotten in the light. “Then be it so. My vision159 reaches far,” said Seven Macaw. Now Seven Macaw was not truly the sun, but he puffed himself up in this way because of his plumage and his gold and his silver. His vision did not reach beyond where he sat. It did not really reach everywhere beneath the sky. Thus Seven Macaw puffed himself up in the days and months before the faces of the sun, moon, and stars could truly be seen. He desired only greatness and transcendence before the light of the sun and moon were revealed in their clarity. This was in the era when the flood was made because of the effigies of carved wood. Now we shall tell how Seven Macaw died; how he was defeated at the time when people were made by the Framer and the Shaper. THE FALL OF SEVEN MACAW AND HIS SONS160 THIS is the beginning of his defeat. This is the shaking161 of the day of Seven Macaw by the twins,162 named Hunahpu163 and Xbalanque.164 They were simply gods. As 158 The scarlet macaw has a shiny white beak. 159 Wach. I base this reading on various compounds of the word that refer to vision or sight, such as solwachij (to gaze, stare fixedly). Wach, however, is a complex word that comprises all the aspects of a thing that give it its essential nature. As such it may be translated as “face, countenance, image, or visage.” Vision is one of the primary aspects of this nature because it is the means by which knowledge is gained (see pp. 197-200; lines 4983-5123). 160 lines 908-984 161 Yiqoxik is literally “to be shaken,” but with the implication of being troubled, disturbed, harassed, disquieted, or fearful. 162 Literally “two sons/boys.” K'ajol (son) is often used in the text to refer to a young man or boy without necessarily emphasizing the parentage of the individual. 163 Here we are introduced for the first time to the twin heroes, Hunahpu and Xbalanque, who will be the central focus of much of the remainder of the mythological portions of the Popol Vuh. Hunahpu has generally been translated in the past as “One Master of the Blowgun” or “One Blowgun Hunter” on the assumption that pu is a shortened version of [p]ub' (blowgun). This may well be the original etymology of the name. In this section of the text, Hunahpu is described as a great blowgun hunter. On the other hand, the authors of the Popol Vuh text consistently wrote the word for blowgun as ub' or wub', not pu. It is therefore unlikely that the Quiché authors of the text had “blowgun” in mind when they wrote the name of this deity. If the Quiché scribes had meant to make it clear that he was a “blowgunner,” they would have used the word currently in use at the time. I believe that they remembered the name as it was handed down to them over the generations and simply preserved the archaic spelling because that was simply his proper name. Hunahpu is treated as a single proper name elsewhere in the text, much like Taylor and Cooper are used as family names without necessarily calling to mind the professions of clothier or barrel maker. The father of the culture hero Hunahpu is named Hun Hunahpu, which if translated literally would mean “One One Master of the Blowgun,” a needlessly redundant reading unless Hunahpu were meant to be read as a single untranslated name. Schele and Mathews have proposed an alternative reading based on a Cholan-Maya language etymology, the language of the Classic Maya (ca. AD 250-900) that dominated the lowland region from Palenque and Calakmul as far south as Copan (Schele and Mathews 1998, 74, 295). Inscriptions from this period refer to the Central Mexican city of Teotihuacan as Puh (Place of Cattail Reeds). This is the Maya language version of Tollan (Nahuatl for “Place of Cattail Reeds), the legendary founding place of the arts and sciences, as well as of political power and legitimacy. This title was given to a number of major centers, including Teotihuacan, Cholula, Chichen Itza, and Tenochtitlan. It is likely that the concept is even older, dating to Olmec traditions in the southern Gulf Coast region, tied to legends of the birth of the world from the primordial sea. The reeds represent the first life to emerge from this place of origin (Schele and Mathews 1998, 200). If Hunahpu is related to this concept, the title could be interpreted as “One/First He of the Place of Cattail Reeds,” meaning that the deity pertains to the legendary founding place of Mesoamerican civilization, or the place of original creation. Hunahpu is also one of the named days of the 260-day sacred calendar still used by the Quichés. This day is associated with the underworld realm of the dead and with rebirth from that realm. I have chosen to leave the name untranslated, as it is used in this context as a proper name, rather than a descriptive term. 164 The derivation of the name Xbalanque is problematic. The prefix x-is a diminutive as well as a feminine indicator. Thus, depending on the context, it may mean “young, small, little,” or it may be used as a female title, such as “lady.” The latter usage has led to some speculation that Xbalanque may have been the twin sister of Hunahpu, acting as the female counterpart to the male powers of the hunter. This theory is not supported by the text, however, which consistently refers to the twins as “sons” or “boys.” Hunahpu himself often carries the x-prefix, although not as consistently as his brother (see lines 4307, 4550, 4576, 4586, 4646, 4725). B'alan is undoubtedly an archaic spelling of b'alam (jaguar), m/n letter substitutions being fairly common in Quiché. Indeed, Vico transcribed the name in his Theologia Indorum as Xbalamquej (Carmack and Morales Santos 1983, 6-8). Known for its ferocity and cunning, the jaguar is the largest predator in Mesoamerica. Rulers decorated their thrones with jaguar symbols and wore jaguar pelts to emphasize lordly power. In addition, the jaguar is associated with ritual powers of transformation and prophecy. The terminal ke is more difficult to interpret. The most likely derivations are kej (deer) or q'ij (sun or day). The latter possibility is intriguing. The Maya closely identified the jaguar with the sun, particularly in its journey through the underworld at night. The story of Xbalanque and his brother focuses on their passage through the underworld, where they defeat the lords of death, ultimately to become the apotheosed sun and moon in the sky. Father Bartolomé de las Casas was told in the sixteenth century that Exbalanquen was a god from the area of the Guatemalan Alta Verapaz who made war with the lords of hell and returned as a great ruler (Las Casas 1958, 427). The word for sun in the Kekchi-Maya dialect of the a result they saw evil in this prideful one who acted according to his own desires before the face of Heart of Sky.165 Thus the boys said: “Good shall never come of this. People will never be able to live here on the face of the earth. Thus we will try to shoot him with our blowguns.166 When he flies over his food, we will shoot him, thus causing him to be afflicted. Then his jade, his gold and silver, his jewels, his glittering things, and all things over which he keeps vigil, will come to an end. “May it be done thus, for people cannot be created where only gold and silver are glory.167 Then be it so,” said the boys. And each one shouldered his blowgun. Now this Seven Macaw had two sons. His firstborn was Zipacna,168 and his secondborn was Cabracan.169 Chimalmat170 was the name of their mother, the wife of Seven Macaw. Alta Verapaz region is q'e, and Xbalamq'e is still remembered by the Kekchi as a sun god (D. Tedlock 1996, 239 n. 77). If this name is purely of Kekchi origin, Balamq’e may be read in that language as “hidden sun, or the night sun” (Ibid.). The most likely translation of the name would therefore be “Young Hidden/Jaguar Sun.” 165 The text makes it clear that the twin heroes Hunahpu and Xbalanque did not act alone or without authority. All their actions were first ordained by the god Heart of Sky (also called Huracan—cf. p. 70; lines 183-189), and were carried out under his direction. 166 The shooting of a bird deity by twin boys armed with blowguns is a frequent subject of Maya art at least as far back as the Early Classic period (AD 200-600), indicating that the theological foundation of this incident is of great antiquity. 167 Q'aq'al is a word laden with culturally-significant implications. Literally it is derived from the root q'aq' (fire, flame), but in this form it refers to “glory, power, majesty.” Thus the twins suggest that the creation of human beings cannot be successful when material wealth such as gold and silver are the sole source of glory and power in the world. 168 Zipacna is most likely derived from the Nahuatl cipactli, a monstrous crocodile whose spiny back symbolized the mountainous earth floating on the primordial sea. This probability is consistent with the Popol Vuh account in which Zipacna declares himself to be the caretaker of the mountains and creator of the earth. Cipactli is also a day on the Central Mexican calendar, suggesting that like other names in the Popol Vuh, this character has calendric associations. This is a long hill in the center of the Rabinal valley Zipacna was he that sustained the great mountains—Chigag,171 Hunahpu,172 Peculya,173 Xcanul,174 Macamob,175 and Huliznab.176 These are the names of the mountains that existed at the time of the dawn. In a single night, they were created by Zipacna. Cabracan was he who would shake the mountains, both small and great, causing them to tremble. But it was only the pride of the sons of Seven Macaw: “This is what I am. I am the sun!” said Seven Macaw. roughly the shape of a crocodile. It is still called Sipac and the people of Rabinal associate it with a crocodile (Akkeren 2000, 60). 169 The Quiché name Kab'raqan may be literally translated “Two His Legs.” In modern usage, this is the common word for “earthquake,” and this interpretation fits Cabracan’s role as a shaker of mountains (p. 96; line 961). Together, the brothers Zipacna and Cabracan comprise a dichotomy of opposites, the one claiming to create the mountains and the other destroying them. 170 Chimalmat is almost certainly derived from the Nahuatl chimalmatl, meaning “shield bearer,” a fairly common name for female deities. In Aztec legend, she was the mother of the Toltec priest-ruler Ce Acatl Topiltzin Quetzalcoatl. Chimalmat is also one of the names for the mother of the Aztecs’ patron god, Huitzilopochtli, as well as the female bearer of cult objects in Aztec migration accounts. Alternatively, the name may be Quiché in origin, consisting of chi (preposition “at, in, to, on, from, etc.) and malmat (Basseta: to walk with haste) or malmot (Coto: “to appear unexpectedly,” particularly with regard to a phantasm). 171 “Mouth Fire,” a volcano in the district of Sacatepequez, Guatemala, nineteen kilometers southeast of Antigua. It is better known by its Spanish name, Volcán de Fuego (Volcano of Fire). 172 Edmonson and Recinos identify this volcano as Volcán de Agua (Spanish: Volcano of Water), also located in the district of Sacatepequez, southeast of Antigua. Tedlock identifies it with Volcán de Acatenango, located in the same district (D. Tedlock 1996, 241 n. 77). In either case, it must be a volcano located near Chigag as the Annals of the Cakchiquels describes it as “standing abreast” of Chigag (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 61). 173 Volcán Acatenango, in the district of Sacatepequez, located southwest of Antigua. Tedlock suggests that this is Volcán de Agua (D. Tedlock 1996, 241 n. 77). 174 Volcán Santa María, southwest of Quetzaltenango, Guatemala. Xkanul is also a general term for volcano in Quiché. 175 Volcán Zunil in the district of Quetzaltenango, Guatemala. 176 The identity of this mountain is unknown. Edmonson identifies it with Tajumulco, a volcano in the district of Huehuetenango, Guatemala (Edmonson 1971, 36 n. 938). “This is what I am. I am the maker of the earth!” said Zipacna. “And I am he who fells the sky and causes the earth to tumble down!” said Cabracan. Now these, the children of Seven Macaw, received their greatness from their father. The boys, Hunahpu and Xbalanque, therefore saw evil in them before the creation of our first mother and our first father. Thus the boys planned their deaths and their loss. THE DEFEAT OF SEVEN MACAW177 THIS, then, is the blowgun shooting of Seven Macaw178 by the twins.179 We shall now tell the story of the defeat of each of the prideful ones. This is Seven Macaw and a great nance tree.180 This, then, is the food of Seven Macaw. Each day he would rise up to the top of the tree to knock down some of the fruit of the nance tree, and it is there that he was seen by Hunahpu and Xbalanque. The twins watched for him beneath the tree, hidden in its leaves. At length Seven Macaw perched on the nance tree to feed and was shot by them. Hunahpu181 directed a 177 lines 985-1188 178 At the beginning of this section, the authors point out certain elements of the story as if they could be seen by the reader. This feature may be evidence that in the Precolumbian version of the Popol Vuh the text was accompanied by painted illustrations. 179 Literally “two sons or boys.” 180 The nance (Byrosinima crassifolia) is a smooth-skinned, yellow tropical fruit about the size of a cherry. 181 Throughout this section on the shooting of Seven Macaw, the authors of the text refer to the first of the twins as One Hunahpu, which is also the name of his father. To avoid confusion, the authors generally shortened the name of the son to Hunahpu or Xhunahpu (Little Hunahpu). For the same reason, I have left the name as Hunahpu. pellet straight from his blowgun into his jaw. Seven Macaw cried out,182 sailing over the top of the tree and landing on the ground. Quickly, Hunahpu ran out to grab him. But instead Seven Macaw tore off the arm of Hunahpu. He wrenched it back, bending it back at the shoulder until it was torn free from Hunahpu. Still, it was good what they did. This first episode will not result in their defeat by Seven Macaw, even though he took away the arm of Hunahpu. So then Seven Macaw went to his home, holding his jaw in his palms. “What have you got there?” asked Chimalmat, the wife of Seven Macaw. “What is it?” “Two demons183 shot me. My jaw was dislocated by them,184 and now my teeth torment me with pain. This I have brought to hang over the fire. It will dangle over the fire until they come to take it back again. Truly they are demons,” said Seven Macaw as he hung the arm of Hunahpu. Then Hunahpu and Xbalanque planned again. They went to speak to the one Grandfather, whose hair was now truly white, and also the one Grandmother, who was now truly humble. They were people who now walked bent over with age. Great White 182 Literally “he broke open his mouth,” a common Quiché expression meaning “to scream, shout, or cry out.” In this case, it is a play on words as well, considering Seven Macaw’s broken jaw. 183 K'axtok' (demon, deceiver) is a derrogatory term for harmful beings, either human or supernatural, particularly when the harm is some form of deception or trickery. In the colonial period, Christian missionaries used the word to refer to devils, and this is still the most common usage in modern Quiché communities. “Demon” or “rascal” is perhaps closer to the ancient authors’ intent, since “devil” carries inappropriate European religious overtones. Tedlock uses the word “trickster.” 184 Perhaps this incident is meant to explain the peculiar bent beak of the macaw, as well as the fact that the lower beak is much smaller than the upper beak. Peccary was the name of the Grandfather, and Great White Coati was the name of the Grandmother. The boys then spoke to the Grandmother and the Grandfather: “We would like you to accompany us to retrieve our arm from Seven Macaw. We will just follow along behind you. You will say to him, ‘Suffer these our grandsons that accompany us. Their mother and father are dead, thus they follow along there behind us. We provide for them by removing worms from teeth,185 which is our profession.’ Thus Seven Macaw will see us merely as children, even while we are giving you our instructions,” said the twins. “Very well,” they said. Thus they came to where Seven Macaw was seated on the edge of his throne. The Grandmother and the Grandfather passed below the home of the lord while the twins played behind them. Now Seven Macaw was crying out because of his teeth. When he saw the Grandfather and Grandmother journeying together, he asked them: “From where do you come, our grandfather?” he asked. “We are just making a living, thou186 lord,” they replied. “How do you make your living? Are not those your children that accompany you?” 185 Chikopil is the collective term for any type of animal. I have chosen “worm” because the Maya believe that toothaches are caused by parasitic worms or insect larvae. Perhaps this is a result of the wormlike appearance of dental pulp seen within broken teeth. 186 Throughout the following passage, Seven Macaw is addressed using the formal lal (somewhat akin to the English “thou”), rather than the more familiar at (“you”). In modern usage, this is a mode of speech reserved for respected officials, lineage patriarchs, or the elderly. Thus the “grandparents” are at least feigning recognition of Seven Macaw’s lordly status. Seven Macaw addresses the elderly grandparents using the familiar “you,” indicating he considers himself more important. “They are not, thou lord. These are our grandsons. But surely we take pity on them and give them a portion. We give them our scraps, thou lord,” said the Grandmother and the Grandfather. The lord was by then nearly finished off because of the pain in his teeth. Therefore it was with great effort that he spoke again: “I beg of you, take pity on me. What medicines187 would you make? With what medicines would you cure?” asked the lord. “We would merely remove worms from teeth, cure eye ailments, and set bones,188 thou lord,” they replied. “Very well. Cure then my teeth, for truly they ache constantly, and I can no longer bear it. I cannot sleep because of them, and the same goes for my eyes. Two demons shot me with a blowgun, and since then I have not been able to eat because of it. Thus take pity on me, for my jaw and my teeth cause me anguish.” “Very well, thou lord. It is a worm that causes the pain. We will merely replace them. Thy teeth will have to come out.” “It is perhaps not a good thing that my teeth come out, for it is only because of them that I am lord. My teeth, along with my eyes, are my finery.” “We shall replace them then with this ground bone.” But instead of ground bone, they were mere white grains of maize that were to be placed. 187 The word ki' may be translated as “medicine, sweet, pulque, alcoholic beverages, poison, or venom.” Only by looking at the context can its meaning be discerned. 188 Bonesetters are still an important group of ritual specialists in many highland Maya communities. In addition to setting bones, they are generally also initiated aj q'ij (daykeeper) priests (B. Tedlock 1982, 57, 74). “Very well then, take them out. Help me,” he said therefore. So then the teeth of Seven Macaw were taken out. As a substitute they placed mere white grains of maize, mere shiny white grains of maize, and immediately his face fell. No longer did he appear as a lord. At length all of the brilliant blue/green jewels in his mouth were removed. Then the eyes of Seven Macaw were treated. His eyes were plucked,189 thus completely removing the precious metal from them. He surely felt no pain. He just stared instead. Thus the basis for his pride was completely taken away according to the plans of Hunahpu and Xbalanque. When at length Seven Macaw died, Hunahpu retrieved his arm. Then also Chimalmat died, the wife of Seven Macaw. Thus the wealth of Seven Macaw was lost, for the healers took it away—the jewels, the precious stones, and all that which had made him proud here upon the face of the earth.190 It was truly the enchanted Grandmother and the enchanted Grandfather that did it. Then the boys retrieved their arm and implanted it back into its socket, making it whole again. They had desired the death of Seven Macaw, and they were able to do it. For they saw pride as evil191 and went to do these things according to the word of Heart of Sky. 189 As a butcher trims meat, or a barber trims hair. It may also refer to the plucking of feathers from a chicken prior to cooking, which is likely the meaning in this passage. This is an explanation for the large white eye patch and unusually small eyes of the scarlet macaw, which appear as if something had been taken away. 190 The Popol Vuh makes it clear that the power and authority of Seven Macaw were based on his wealth rather than his own abilities. When his riches were taken away, he was susceptible to defeat. 191 Itzel. It is difficult to discern how this word was understood prior to the Spanish conquest. Colonial dictionaries associate it with witchcraft and evil, and this is still a major connotation of the word in modern Quiché usage. This interpretation likely has Spanish Christian influences, however, which did not exist in THE DEEDS OF ZIPACNA AND THE FOUR HUNDRED BOYS192 THESE now are the deeds of Zipacna, the firstborn son of Seven Macaw. “I am the maker of mountains,” said Zipacna. Now this Zipacna was bathing on the banks of a river when there passed by four hundred boys,193 dragging a tree to be used as a supporting beam for their hut. These four hundred were walking along, having cut down a great tree for a lintel.194 Zipacna therefore came to the four hundred boys and asked them: “What are you doing, boys?” “It’s just this tree; we cannot lift it to our shoulders to carry it.” “I will carry it on my shoulders. Where does it go? What use does it have in your hearts?” “It is to be the lintel for our hut.” “Very well,” he said therefore. Thus he carried it on his shoulders up to the doorway195 of the hut of the four hundred boys. Precolumbian Quiché culture. Coto also lists under this word “falseness, filth, ugliness, error, perversion, and worthlessness.” Basseta simply interprets it as “bad.” 192 lines 1189-1385 193 The Maya system of numbers is vigesimal, based on twenty. O' much' is literally five sets of eighty, or four hundred. 194 The lintel of a structure is ritually significant. The world is conceived by the Maya as a great house, its corners being the four cardinal points, its roof the sky, and its foundation the underworld (Vogt 1976, 58). The lintel represents the principal access point of the interior space and was often ornately decorated in Precolumbian times. Such beams are therefore seen as endowed with great power, particularly those used in the homes of spiritual leaders. Zipacna’s brazen usurpation of the great wooden beam may indicate that he is taking upon himself the power of this sacred access point without authority or ritual preparation. If this interpretation is correct, Zipacna’s ultimate destruction as ordained by the creator god, Heart of Sky, is more understandable. 195 Literally “its mouth hut.” “Stay with us, boy. Do you have a mother or a father?” “There is no one,” he replied. “Surely we beseech you then to help us, for tomorrow another tree will be raised as a supporting beam for our hut.” “Fine,” he said again. Then the four hundred boys made their plans: “This boy, what will we do to him? We will kill him. For it is not good what he does, just lifting the tree all by himself. Let us therefore dig a great hole, and then we shall abandon196 him there. We will say to him, ‘Go dig out the earth from the bottom of the hole.’ And when he is bent over down there in the hole, we will hurl down the great tree, and thus he will die there in the hole,” said the four hundred boys. And so they dug a great hole that went down very deep. Then they sent for Zipacna: “We entrust you to go now to dig in the ground, for we are not able to do it,” he was told. “Very well,” he replied. Thus he went down into the hole. “Call when you have finished digging up the earth, for you must go down deep,” he was told. “Fine,” he replied. Then he began to dig in the hole. But this hole was to be his own salvation. He had learned that he was to be killed, and therefore he had dug a branching hole to one side. It was in this secondary hole that he was saved. 196 Tzaq may mean “to throw down, to lose, or to abandon” something. The latter interpretation is closer to what actually occurred. “How far are you into it?” he was asked by the four hundred boys. “I am digging it quickly. When I shall call up to you there, then the digging will have been successfully completed,” called Zipacna from the hole. But he did not dig his own tomb there at the bottom of the hole; rather he dug the means for his own salvation. Therefore, when Zipacna called up, he had already saved himself there inside the hole: “Come and take the earth away—the dirt that I have dug up from the hole. Truly deep have I dug down. Can you not hear my call? Your voices just echo away as if you were a long way off when I hear them,” said Zipacna from his hole. Thus he was already sheltered when he called up from inside the hole. The boys then dragged over the great tree and hurled it down into the hole. “He is no more. He does not speak. When he cries out, we will know that he shall be dead,” they whispered to each other. For they each hid their purpose when they hurled down the tree. So when he spoke he cried out with a loud voice, he called out one more word when they dropped down the tree. “Aha, we have succeeded! Truly good! We have done it to him. He died. What kind of omen would it have been if he had persisted in carrying out his deeds, his work? Then he might have become first among us, placing himself over us, even us the four hundred boys,” they said. And so they rejoiced: “For three days we will merely make sweet drink.197 And when three days have passed, we will drink to our dwelling, to our hut, even us the four hundred boys!” they said. “Tomorrow and the next day we will see if ants don’t come forth from the ground when he begins to stink and decompose. Then will our hearts be comforted, when we will drink our sweet drink,” they said. But Zipacna heard this down there in the hole when they said this. And on the second day, the ants assembled themselves. They walked about. They swarmed beneath the tree. Everywhere they carried in their teeth the hair as well as the nails of Zipacna. Now when the boys saw this, they said to each other: “The demon is finished. Look at the ants. They have gathered together. They have assembled here, and everywhere they carry his hair in their teeth. Surely they can be seen carrying his nails. We have done it at last,” they said to each other. But Zipacna was still alive. He had merely cut the hair off his own head and gnawed off his own nails to give to the ants. Thus the four hundred boys thought that he had died. 197 Ki'y may refer to an alcoholic beverage, something sweet, medicine, poison, or even snake or insect venom. In this context, ki'y refers to an intoxicating drink, likely some form of chicha, a home-made fermented drink popular in the Guatemalan highlands made from various fruits, berries, cane, or maize. Alternatively it may be pulque, made from the fermented sap of the maguey (agave, or century plant). Pulque is viscous, milky-white, and slightly foamy. It ferments very quickly, generally within twelve hours and has an alcohol content of 6%, approximately the same as the average beer. A distilled form of this ancient drink is sold today as mezcal or tequila, although the distillation process was not known prior to the Spanish conquest. In Aztec mythology, pulque is personified by gods known as the Centzon Totochtin (400 Rabbits), who appear frequently in painted manuscripts such as the Codex Magliabechiano. These gods are also associated by the Aztecs with the four hundred youths slain by the god Huitzilopochtli as ritual sacrifices. The deaths of the four hundred youths in the Popol Vuh account may thus have had ritual significance. The beverage referred to could also possibly be balche, made from fermented honey and the bark of the balche tree. Alcohol is a prevalent part of highland Maya society, used both socially as well as a necessary component of ceremonial observances. On the third day, they started in on their sweet drink. All the boys became drunk. All four hundred boys thus were drunk and didn’t feel anything when Zipacna collapsed their hut down upon their heads. As a result, all of them were finished, struck down every one of them. Not even one or two of the four hundred boys were saved. Such was the death of these four hundred boys at the hands of Zipacna, the son of Seven Macaw. It is said that they became the constellation known as the Pleiades,198 but perhaps this is merely a fable.199 Now we will tell the story of the defeat of Zipacna by the twins, Hunahpu and Xbalanque. THE DEFEAT OF ZIPACNA200 THIS now is the overthrow and death of Zipacna. He was defeated by the twins, Hunahpu and Xbalanque, whose hearts were offended by the deaths of the four hundred boys at the hands of Zipacna. Now this Zipacna would spend each day wandering in search of his food, only fish and crabs, which he looked for in the rivers. By night, however, he would carry mountains on his back. Thus Hunahpu and Xbalanque transformed for him a great crab. For this purpose, they used a bromelia flower,201 the kind of bromeliad that may be picked in the forests, to 198 Motz. The Pleiades are a cluster of stars in the constellation of Taurus (composing a spot on the Bull’s shoulder). It is derived from the word meaning to gather together in large numbers. 199 Literally “whiteness word.” This is a play on words, fable, or fantastic story. 200 lines 1386-1524 make the open claws. For its shell and backside, they used a hollowed-out stone. This shell they placed at the bottom of a cave below a great mountain. Meauan202 was the name of this mountain where he was defeated. When the boys came, they found Zipacna by the river: “Where are you going, boy?” they asked Zipacna. “I’m not going anywhere. I’m just searching for my food,” replied Zipacna. “What is your food?” “Only fish and crabs, but I haven’t found any yet. It has been two days since I have eaten, and now I cannot bear the hunger,” said Zipacna to Hunahpu and Xbalanque. “There is a crab there below the canyon. It is truly a great crab. Why don’t you try your luck with it?” asked Hunahpu and Xbalanque. “Perhaps you will be able to eat it. It merely bit us when we tried to catch it, so we are afraid of it. But he will not go away and you could catch it.” “Take pity on me. Guide me there, boys,” said Zipacna. “We do not want to. Just go along yourself. There is no way that you will get lost if you just follow the course of the river until you reach the base of the great mountain. There it will be, situated below the canyon. Just go along over there,” said Hunahpu and Xbalanque. 201 Ek' (bromelia) is a parasitic tropical flower. It grows from the branches of trees and has long, pointed red petals that look somewhat like the legs of a crab. The Quichés today use bromelia flowers to decorate festive arches and the shrines of Christian saints. 202 Meauan was identified by Brasseur and Recinos as a mountain west of Rabinal, Guatemala (Brasseur 1858, 128; Recinos 1950, 102 n. 3). It is likely the mountain known today as Miagua, located some 20 km. northwest of Rabinal and bordering the Chixoy River (Akkeren 2000, 299). If this identification is correct, Akkeren suggests that Meauan may be a contracted form of me'al ajaw (daughter lord), the Quiché version of the Kekchi origin of the town’s name, Rab'inal (Place of the Lord’s Daughter) (2000, 60, 66). “Please take pity on me. I will never find it, boys. You go first as my guides. I know where there are many birds that you could shoot with your blowguns,” said Zipacna. He humbled himself before them, promising to reward them. He wept before them. “Perhaps you will not be able to catch it. Then you would return like we did. Because not only were we not able to eat it, but it would straightaway bite us. We went in there headfirst on our stomachs,203 but it became frightened. A little later we went in lying on our backs, but we couldn’t find it again. Thus it would be good if you went in lying on your back,” he was told. “Very well,” replied Zipacna. Thus they left, accompanied by Zipacna. At length they arrived below the canyon where the crab was placed, its surface bright red there at the base of the canyon. This was their deception.204 “That’s good,” rejoiced Zipacna. He wanted to put it straight in his mouth because he was truly famished and wanted to eat it. He just wanted to go in headfirst on his stomach.205 But the crab climbed high up, and Zipacna came back out. 203 Jupulik is to lie face down/on one’s stomach. It may also be used to indicate “headfirst.” Both meanings are likely applicable in this context. 204 The word used here is kumatzij, which is a pain caused by cramps, arthritis, etc. It is derived from kumatz (serpent, twisted). My reading is based on the assumption that the word is actually a contraction of two words, kumatz tzij (twisted word—deception, lie). 205 The implication of the story is that the Twins had tried to get Zipacna to enter the cave on his back where he would be prone and helpless. If Zipacna was a crocodile, as his name implies (Zipacna is likely derived from the Nahuatl cipactli—crocodile), he would be helpless because crocodiles cannot move well “Didn’t you get it?” he was asked. “No. It climbed high up and after awhile I couldn’t find it again. Perhaps it would be good then if I went in again lying on my back,” he said therefore. Then he went back in again lying on his back. He went all the way in until only his kneecaps showed outside. Thus he was completely swallowed up. The mountain then settled down onto his chest so that he could not turn over again. Zipacna became stone. Thus was the defeat of Zipacna at the hands of the boys, Hunahpu and Xbalanque. Such is the ancient account of the first son of Seven Macaw, the Maker of Mountains, as he was called, who was defeated beneath the mountain called Meauan.206 It was merely enchantment by which this second prideful one was defeated. Now we shall tell the tale of another. THE DEFEAT OF CABRACAN207 THE third prideful one was the second son of Seven Macaw, Cabracan by name. “I am the wrecker of mountains,” said he. when flipped over on their backs. Despite the Twins’ admonition, however, Zipacna did the natural thing and rushed headlong on his belly into the cave to reach the crab. Just as the Twins had predicted, the crab was frightened and climbed up high out of his reach. In this position he could not look up nor lift his arms above his head. Zipacna thus took the Twins’ original advice to go back in and try again on his back, perhaps giving him hope that he could then reach up to grab the crab as it climbed upward. When the mountain settled down on his prone form, he was unable to flip back over again. 206 This association between Zipacna and earthquakes continued well-after the Conquest. Coto wrote the following under the heading of estremesçerse (Spanish: tremor): “Cabrakan [Quiché: earthquake] is the tremor of the earth. They once believed, and continue to believe today, that beneath the earth there is a giant who holds up the earth who they call Çipacnay, and when he moves the earth trembles, and that this is the god of earthquakes” (Coto 1983, 224. Translation by author). In the contemporary Rabinal version of the myth, a hungry creature who moved mountains and volcanoes without any effort was lured into a cave by a woman from Coban where there was a crab hiding. Once inside, the mountain collapsed on him and he became the hill visible today (Shaw 1971, 46-51; Akkeren 2000, 70). 207 lines 1525-1720 It was simply because of Hunahpu and Xbalanque that Cabracan was defeated. Then Huracan, Youngest Thunderbolt, and Sudden Thunderbolt spoke to Hunahpu and Xbalanque, saying: “According to my word, the second son of Seven Macaw must also be defeated. For it is not good what they have done upon the earth. They surpass the sun in greatness and importance,208 and this is not as it should be. Thus, lure him away there to the East, where the sun rises,” said Huracan to the twins.209 “Very well, thou lord. It has always been thus, that we do not approve of him.210 For he is not lifted up where thou art, thou Heart of Sky,” the boys replied when they received the word of Huracan. Now this Cabracan occupied himself as a wrecker of mountains. He would simply tap his foot a little on the surface of the earth, and straightaway mountains, both small and great, would tumble down.211 Then he was met by the twins: “Where are you going, boy?” they asked Cabracan. “I’m not going anywhere. I am merely a feller of mountains. I will wreck them as long as there is sun and light,”212 he said when he spoke to them. 208 Literally “weightiness.” According to Basseta, nimal (greatness) and alal (weightiness, importance) together form a couplet that refers to “power.” 209 Thus it is Huracan (also known as Heart of Sky) who directs the actions of the twins in overthrowing the pride of Seven Macaw and his two sons. 210 Literally “not good we see them,” a common Quiché expression for “not liking or disapproving” of something. 211 B'ulij describes the mountains cascading or tumbling down like water from a mountain spring. 212 This is a common Quiché expression still used today in a somewhat shortened form, chi b'e q'ij saq, meaning roughly “as long as there is sun and light” or simply “forever.” Then Cabracan spoke again to Hunahpu and Xbalanque: “Where have you come from? I do not know your faces. What are your names?” asked Cabracan. “We have no names.213 We have just been blowgunning and trapping in the mountains. We are just poor orphans, for there is nothing that is ours, boy. We just wander in the mountains, both small and great. There is one great mountain that we saw that keeps growing until truly high it ascends. It simply rises up, far above the peaks of all the mountains. We could not catch even one or two birds before its face. Is it really true that you fell all mountains, boy?” asked Hunahpu and Xbalanque of Cabracan. “Is it true that you saw this mountain of which you speak? Where is it? You shall surely see that I will fell it. Where did you see it?” “There it is in the East, where the sun rises,” said Hunahpu and Xbalanque. “Good. You lead the way,”214 the twins were told. “No, you just take the middle place between us, one on your left and one on your right hand. We have our blowguns, and if there are any birds, we will shoot them,” they said. They rejoiced that they could practice their shooting. But there were no clay pellets in their blowguns. When they shot them, they merely blew at the birds. Thus Cabracan was amazed. 213 In many ancient cultures, revealing one’s name was not taken lightly; it was believed that to do so was to relinquish power. 214 Literally “take our road” or, as paraphrased in a somewhat similar English phrase, “lead the way.” Then the boys used a twist drill to make their fire, upon which they roasted the birds. They covered the skin of one of the birds with quicklime until it was coated with white earth. “We will give this to him when he becomes ravenous with hunger.215 When he savors the aroma of our birds, he will be defeated. We will put earth on its skin. We will cook it in earth. In the same way, therefore, he himself will be buried in the earth. This must be if the great sage, the one to be framed and shaped, is to be sown and to have his dawn,” the boys said. “Cabracan shall desire with all his heart216 to eat what we will cook. This shall be the desire of the heart of Cabracan,” said Hunahpu and Xbalanque to each other. Then they roasted the birds until they had been cooked to a golden brown. They would drip with fat from their skins and give off a fragrant aroma. Thus Cabracan desired to be fed. His mouth watered. He just gulped and drooled saliva and spittle because of the fragrance of the birds. Thus he begged of them: “What is it that you are eating? Its aroma is truly delicious to smell. Give me a little,” he said therefore. Then they gave to Cabracan a bird, and this was his defeat. When he had finished the bird, they went on their way again until they arrived in the East. There they came to the great mountain. 215 Jiq'onoq is “to be ravenous, gluttonous, excited with desire.” 216 K'uxilal is a “longing for something with all one’s heart, a desire for something above all else.” But by now the legs and arms of Cabracan had become weak.217 Never again would he be strong because of the earth coated on the skin of the bird he had eaten. He could no longer do anything to the mountains. He did not succeed in causing them to fall apart. Then the boys tied him up. They tied his hands behind his back. The boys were mindful to make sure that his hands were well bound. They also tied his ankles218 together. Then they hurled him down into the earth and buried him.219 Thus Cabracan was defeated at the hands of Hunahpu and Xbalanque. Innumerable were their deeds here on the face of the earth. Now we shall tell of the birth of Hunahpu and Xbalanque, having first given the account of the defeat of Seven Macaw along with Zipacna and Cabracan here upon the earth. THE TALE OF THE FATHER OF HUNAHPU AND XBALANQUE220 WE shall now name the name of the father of Hunahpu and Xbalanque. We shall retell it.221 We shall merely repeat the tale, the account of the engendering of Hunahpu 217 The word is often used to describe old or wornout clothing in addition to something that is weak. 218 Literally “its neck his legs.” In Quiché phraseology, the neck of the arm is the wrist, and the neck of the leg is the ankle. 219 Even today the Quichés associate earthquakes with a bound giant buried beneath the mountains. The following story was recorded by Ruth Bunzel at the Quiché town of Chichicastenango: “They say of the earthquake, that there is a giant under the earth, bound by his hands and feet, and when there is a slight tremor, it is because he has moved his hands or feet a little; and when he turns over on the other side is when there are strong earthquakes” (Bunzel 1952, 428). 220 lines 1721-1732 and Xbalanque. But we shall tell only the half of it, the smallest part of the tale of their father. THE DEEDS OF ONE HUNAHPU AND SEVEN HUNAHPU ABOVE XIBALBA222 THIS, therefore, is the account of they whose names are One Hunahpu223 and Seven Hunahpu. For thus they are called. It was in the darkness, in the night, when One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu were born to Xpiyacoc and Xmucane. Now this One Hunahpu had two children, both sons. One Batz224 was the name of his firstborn, and One Chouen225 was the name of his secondborn. The name of their mother was Xbaquiyalo.226 Thus she was called, the wife of One Hunahpu. But Seven Hunahpu had no wife. He was merely a companion, merely secondary. By his nature, he was like a servant227 to One Hunahpu. They were great thinkers, for 221 Literally “we shall retell its head.” This is a problematic passage. Tedlock follows Edmonson, who believes that the verb used in the text, camuh, is a scribal error and should be cumuh (to drink), implying that the authors of the text are proposing a kind of toast to the telling of the story of the fathers of Hunahpu and Xbalanque (Edmonson 1971, 58; D. Tedlock 1996, 91, 249 n. 91). Tedlock used this passage as evidence that the authors of the Popol Vuh were “Toastmasters” (D. Tedlock 1985), or “Masters of Ceremonies” (D. Tedlock 1996). I prefer to read the verb as a shortened version of camuluh (to retell, review, repeat, go over again). 222 lines 1733-1918 223 Junajpu is a day on the traditional highland Maya calendar, dedicated to the memory of ancestors. 224 B'atz' is the Quiché word for the howler monkey. It is also one of the named days from the traditional highland Maya calendar. 225 Chouen is derived from the Yucatec Maya word chuen, meaning “howler monkey.” In addition, aj chuen is a title meaning “artisan” (Barrera Vásquez 1995, 110), a reading consistent with the artistic nature of these twins. Twin monkey scribes appear frequently in Classic Maya art as patrons of writing. It is also the Yucatec Maya day name that corresponds to the day B'atz' in the Quiché calendar. 226 Xbaquiyalo. The likely etymology of this name is x-(lady), baqi (bone), ya' (water/river), lo (perhaps), yielding Lady Bone Water. Tedlock notes that in Yucatec, bak ha' (also “bone water”) is the snowy egret or snowy heron, and thus translates the name as “Egret Woman” (D. Tedlock 1996, 250 n. 91). 227 K'ajol is literally “son,” or “boy,” but it is a common metaphor used throughout the text for servant, which seems to be the meaning in this context. great was their knowledge. They were seers here upon the face of the earth. They were good by their nature, and in their birth as well.228 They revealed their talents229 to One Batz and One Chouen, the sons of One Hunahpu. Thus One Batz and One Chouen became flautists and singers, writers and sculptors, jade workers and precious metalsmiths.230 As for One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu, they would merely play dice and ball everyday. The four of them would pair off to oppose each other. When they gathered together to play in the ballcourt, the Falcon would arrive to watch over them. This Falcon was the messenger of Huracan, Youngest Thunderbolt, and Sudden Thunderbolt. The face of the earth was not far for him. Nor was Xibalba231 far for him. In an instant, he could return again to the sky with Huracan. Thus they tarried here upon the earth. By then the mother of One Batz and One Chouen had died. 228 Yake'ik (to arise) is also a metaphor for birth, which is likely the connotation here. 229 Na'wikil is “talent, ingenuity, genius, skill, cleverness, inventiveness.” 230 Tedlock believes that this list of six occupations should be divided into two sets of poetic triplets, thus grouping writers with flautists and singers as performing artists. Such a grouping would imply that the composition of literary texts such as the Popol Vuh is based more on an oral tradition than carved or painted inscriptions (D. Tedlock 1985, 269). I come to the opposite conclusion. The more likely arrangement for the list would be three sets of couplets, the preferred type of parallelism throughout the text. In addition, writers and carvers are paired without question on pp. 141, 147 (lines 2568-2569, 2714.2715). Thus the authors of painted codices are closely associated with those who carve inscriptions on stone monuments. Far from suggesting that the Popol Vuh is based on an oral tradition, this passage implies that the authors consider ancient writers to have set down their literary creations in a manual process. This implication strengthens the view that the Popol Vuh is based on a painted text. 231 Xib'alb'a (Place of Fear) is the Quiché name for the underworld, ruled by lords of death and disease. Modern Quichés still use the word to describe an underground hell inhabited by demons who cause sickness. Now it was on the path leading to Xibalba where they played ball. Thus the lords of Xibalba, One Death and Seven Death,232 heard them: “What is happening on the surface of the earth? They are just stomping about and shouting. May they be summoned here therefore. They shall come to play ball, and we shall defeat them. They have simply failed to honor us. They have neither honor nor respect. Certainly they act arrogantly233 here over our heads,” said therefore all those of Xibalba. Then they whose names were One Death and Seven Death gathered all of their thoughts. These, therefore, were the great judges, all of them lords. Each was given his task and his dominion by One Death and Seven Death: These are the lords named Flying Scab234 and Gathered Blood.235 Their task is to sicken people in their blood. These, then, are the lords Pus Demon and Jaundice Demon.236 Their dominion is to swell people up until pus oozes from the skin of their legs, and the skin of their faces 232 Kame (Death) is a named day on the highland Maya calendar. The death lords thus both bear calendric dates as their names. 233 Jikik is to “act arrogantly, act insolently, insult, or mock”. 234 Pat is a “snare, trap” in Quiché. Campbell, however, suggests that this is likely a loan word from Kekchi, meaning “scab, crusted sore” (Campbell 1983, 82). This reading fits the context better in that it parallels the paired demon, Gathered Blood. 235 Kuchuma Kik' (Gathered Blood) is still known by Quiché storytellers as a cruel lord of the underworld who gathers blood shed upon the ground as a result of injury, illness, or violence. This blood is then served to his fellow lords at a banquet. 236 Ajal Puj, Ajal Q'ana. Ajal is likely a loan word from Chol, meaning “evil spirit” (Campbell 1983, 81). Puj is “pus,” and q'ana is “yellowness, jaundice.” becomes yellow with jaundice, as it is said. Thus this is the dominion of Pus Demon and Jaundice Demon. These, then, are the lords Bone Staff and Skull Staff, the staff bearers237 of Xibalba. Their staffs are mere bones. These staff bearers are they who skeletize people until they are truly bones and skulls. As a result, they would die having received only emaciated bones, bloated with starvation.238 These are they whose names are Bone Staff and Skull Staff. These, then, are the lords whose names are Sweepings Demon239 and Stabbings Demon.240 Their task is simply to overtake people if they abandon sweepings and trash in back or in front of their houses. These would be overtaken and stabbed by them until they fall face down upon the earth and die. This, therefore, is the dominion of Sweepings Demon and Stabbings Demon, as they are called. 237 As emblems of office, Quiché political and religious leaders carry staffs that are often topped with ornate silver carvings symbolizing divine power. 238 “Emaciated bones, swelling he will receive.” This couplet refers to the end stages of starvation. Most of the body becomes emaciated, while the belly becomes distended from fluid collecting in the tissues due to a lack of protein. This latter condition is called ascites. 239 In modern usage, mes refers to “trash or garbage,” but more literally it refers to “sweepings.” The trash produced by Quichés is that which is swept away from a floor, pathway, or porch while cleaning. Thus a broom is referred to as a mesb'al (instrument of sweepings). Tedlock’s collaborator, Andrés Xiloj, pointed out that the best way to keep away the demons of Xibalba was to keep one’s house swept clean and not allowing trash to accumulate (D. Tedlock 1996, 253, n. 92). Diego Chávez, a prominent artist in Santiago Atitlán related the following story with regard to a carved wooden panel in his home that depicts a cabecera (head elder within the traditional confraternity system) administering justice: “It reminds me of the old days when people respected the Maya confraternity officials and we had no need for jails. Now all people know is killing and thievery. In this panel I show a woman accused of not respecting her family. At that time if she were found guilty, the cabecera would send her to sweep all of the dust around the church. In this way she would remember to sweep the uncleanness from her own life even as she swept the church for the benefit of the town” (Christenson 2000, 194). 240 Based on the root toq' (to stab, to gore). These, then, are they whose names are Lord Wing241 and Packstrap.242 Their dominion is the people who die on the road as a result of sudden death, as it is called. Blood would come to their mouths, and they would die vomiting blood. Each one has his task, the burden he carries on his shoulders. They would simply wear out the necks and the hearts of these people so that they die on the road. They would cause this to happen outside. When people go out walking, they would come upon them. This, then, is the dominion of Wing and Packstrap. These, therefore, gathered together their thoughts when One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu were persecuted and harassed.243 For the Xibalbans desired the gaming things of One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu—their leathers, their yokes,244 their arm 241 The manuscript reads xic. If this is to be interpreted as xik', this is “wing”; alternatively, if it is to be understood as xik, it is a “hawk.” I prefer the former reading only because hawks do not have underworld or malevolent associations in contemporary highland Maya communities. 242 Patan is the tumpline or pack strap (Spanish mecapal) worn by porters across the forehead to secure burdens carried on the back. This lord causes the sudden death of people carrying heavy burdens on the road. Having myself carried loads in this way over miles of mountain trails, I have had many an opportunity to curse this particularly malevolent underworld lord. 243 Contemporary Quichés also believe that illness is caused by various underworld lords. The following is from a prayer for protection in which the lords of illness and death are invoked and propitiated with offerings at a shrine in the cemetery at Chichicastenango. Among these are the “lord of sickness and pain, of death and destruction in the roads and trails, of death and destruction through aguardiente, of death and destruction from food poisoning, of death and destruction from vomiting, of death and destruction from strain and exertion—come hither, be seated before this World of the cemetery! And also the master of pain and misfortune, of wounds from pistols and knives and cutlasses, from Remingtons and Mausers, come hither, be seated before this World of the cemetery! And also the lord of vomiting and indigestion, the lord of fever and dysentery, and also the lord of cold sweat (malaria) and green chill (tuberculosis), of swellings of the abdomen (cancer), of influenza and bronchitis, and also the lord of all the minor illnesses; and also the lord of smallpox, come hither before this mountain shrine of the cemetery! Be seated here, however many may be your manifestations; look upon us here before this World. Be seated, all of you. Lords, pardon my trespass” (Bunzel 1952, 390). 244 Unfortunately b'ate does not appear in any early colonial dictionaries, perhaps because the ballgame ceased to be played soon after the Spanish conquest. Thus the names for the equipment used in the game fell out of usage. From the description found later in the Popol Vuh text, the ball bounces off of this article in the process of playing the game. I have chosen to translate the word as “yoke,” a well-known article of ballgame equipment throughout Precolumbian Mesoamerica. It is a U-shaped apparatus worn about the hips and used for striking the ball to keep it in play. Yokes were probably made of wood, although protectors,245 their headdresses, and their face masks—the finery of One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu. Now we shall tell of their journey to Xibalba. One Batz and One Chouen, the sons of One Hunahpu, remained behind. Their mother had died. Later One Batz and One Chouen will be defeated by Hunahpu and Xbalanque. THE SUMMONS OF ONE HUNAHPU AND SEVEN HUNAHPU TO XIBALBA246 THEN was the arrival of the messengers of One Death and Seven Death: “Go you war councilors247 to summon One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu. Tell them when you arrive, ‘Thus say the lords: They must come, say the lords to you. They must come here to play ball with us that we may be invigorated by them. Truly we are amazed greatly at them. Thus they must come, say the lords. May they bring hither their implements—their yokes, their arm protectors, and their rubber ball248 as well. Thus say the lords,’ tell them when you arrive there,” the messengers were told. intricately carved stone replicas have been found in many parts of ancient Mesoamerica, particularly along the Gulf Coast of Veracruz. 245 Depictions of Precolumbian ballplayers in ancient Maya art often show the lower arms wrapped with a protective device. 246 lines 1919-2032 247 Raj pop achij (he of the mat of warriors). Aj pop is a title given to lords or rulers, as well as to those who sit on ruling councils. Achij is literally “man” but is generally used in the Popol Vuh text to refer to soldiers/warriors. 248 Kik' is the vital fluid of any living thing (blood for animals, sap for trees, etc.). Rubber, as well as a ball made from rubber, is also called kik' since it is made from the sap of the rubber tree (Castilla elastica). These messengers were the owls249—Arrow Owl, One Leg Owl, Macaw Owl, and Skull Owl—for so the messengers of Xibalba were called. This Arrow Owl was like the arrow, piercing.250 This One Leg Owl merely had one leg, but there were his wings. This Macaw Owl had a red back, and there were also his wings. Now this Skull Owl only had a skull with no legs; there were merely wings. The burden251 of these four messengers was to be the war councilors. Thus they arrived there from Xibalba. They arrived suddenly, perching atop the ballcourt.252 One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu were playing ball at the court that was called Honor and Respect253 at Carchah254 when they came. The owls, therefore, alighted atop the ballcourt, where they delivered in order the words of One Death and Seven 249 Owls continue to be regarded as heralds of sickness and death by the Quichés, and they are extremely unwelcome anywhere near homes (Oakes 1951, 46; Bunzel 1952, 272, 343; Schultze-Jena 1954, 84; Watanabe 1992, 68). 250 Based on the root kopij, kopkik is something that “strikes, pierces, or causes harm.” In this context, “pierce” fits the arrow analogy best. 251 Eqalem, is a burden carried on the back. Metaphorically, the Maya use the word for “burden” (Spanish cargo) to refer to an “office or responsibility.” 252 Maya ballcourts were generally bounded by high stone walls. The owls apparently alighted on top of one of these. 253 Nim (Honor) Xob' (Respect). Notice that on page 115 (lines 1818-1819), the lords of Xibalba complained that those who were playing ball above their heads did not give them proper “honor” or “respect,” the same two words which comprise the name of the ballcourt in these lines. Nimxor is listed in the Annals of the Cakchiquels as a place near Carchah in the Alta Verapaz region, thus this is likely a play on words (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 64). 254 Kar Cha'j (Fish Ballcourt/Ashes). This may be a play on words between ashes (chaj ) and ballcourt (cha'j). It is likely a reference to the Kekchi-Maya town now known as San Pedro Carchá located near Cobán, a city east and somewhat north of Quiché territory. Modern Quichés have vague notions of the entrance to the underworld being located in the Alta Verapaz region inhabited by the Kekchis. It is perhaps significant that later in the story the sons of One Hunahpu also descended into Xibalba to confront the lords of death in the underworld ballcourt. They ultimately died by hurling themselves into a furnace. Their ashes were then cast into a river which resulted in their being revived as “people-fish.” Death, Pus Demon and Jaundice Demon, Bone Staff and Skull Staff, Flying Scab and Gathered Blood, Sweepings Demon and Stabbings Demon, Wing and Packstrap. For these are the names of all the lords. Thus the owls repeated their words. “Are these not the words of the lords One Death and Seven Death?” “Those are the words that they said,” replied the owls. “We shall surely be your companions. ‘You shall bring all the gaming things,’ say the lords.” “Very well. But wait for us while we leave instructions behind with our mother,” they said. Thus they went to their home to speak to their mother, for their father had died: “We must surely go, our mother. The messengers of the lord have just arrived to take us. ‘They must come,’ we were told. Thus the summoners have spoken. But this, our rubber ball, shall remain behind,” they said. Then they went to tie it up above the house. “We will surely return to use it again. Until then, merely play the flute and sing, write and carve.” In this way One Batz and One Chouen were instructed. “Thus you shall warm our home, and you shall warm the heart of your grandmother.” But their mother, Xmucane, wept bitterly.255 “We must go, but we will not die. Do not grieve,” said One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu as they left. 255 The manuscript reads quz quz. Coto writes that the expression euzeuh que'in oe means to “cry much, with great pain.” THE DESCENT OF ONE HUNAHPU AND SEVEN HUNAHPU INTO XIBALBA256 THEN went One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu, guided by the messengers as they descended along the path to Xibalba. They went down steep steps until they came out again upon the banks of turbulent river canyons. Trembling Canyon and Murmuring Canyon were the names of the canyons that they passed through. They also passed through turbulent rivers. They passed through Scorpion River, where there were innumerable scorpions. But they were not stung. Then they arrived at Blood River. They were able to pass through it because they did not drink from it. Then they arrived at Pus River, which was nothing but a river of pus. Neither were they defeated here but simply passed through it as well. At length they arrived at a crossroads,257 and it was here at the four crossing roads that they were defeated. One was Red Road and another was Black Road; White Road was one while another was Yellow Road.258 Thus there were four roads. Now this, the black road said: “Me! Take me, for I am the lord’s road.” Thus spoke the road. 256 lines 2033-2267 257 Crossroads are considered to be extremely dangerous by the Maya because they are focal points for the unseen powers of all directions. Ximénez wrote that the ancient Quichés ceremonially collected the sins of their community and abandoned them at crossroads (Ximénez 1929-31, pp. 84-85). 258 The Maya associated the cardinal directions with colors. The Quichés associated white with north, red with east, yellow with south, and black with west. Modern rituals often begin by placing candles with these corresponding colors at the cardinal directions in order to symbolically delimit the corners of the world. Thus the brothers were tricked into following the black, or west, road—a premonition of their defeat and death since this is the road that the sun takes when its sinks into the underworld. But it was there that they were defeated. They started then on the road to Xibalba. At last they arrived at the council place of the lords of Xibalba, and there again they were defeated. They who were seated first in order were mere effigies of carved wood, adorned259 by the Xibalbans. It was these, then, that they greeted: “Morning,260 One Death,” they said to the first effigy. “Morning, Seven Death,” they said again to the carved wood. Thus they did not prevail. Instead, the lords of Xibalba roared261 with laughter. They merely roared with laughter, all the lords, because they had completely prevailed. In their hearts, they had defeated One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu. And after they had laughed, One Death and Seven Death spoke: “It is good that you have come. Tomorrow you shall put to use your yokes and your arm protectors,” they were told. “Sit down on our bench,”262 they were told. But the bench that they were offered was nothing but a very hot stone, and they were burned when they sat on it. Truly they spun around on top of it. Neither did they find relief. Truly they leaped up when their seats263 were burned. 259 Wutalik is “adorned, dressed up, fitted out.” 260 The greeting q'ala' means literally “be it clear.” It is somewhat akin to the common Quiché greeting at the beginning of the day, saqirik (it brightens or it dawns), referring to the arrival of morning. 261 jumujub' (to roar) is based on jumumik, which denotes the sound of an earthquake, a passing truck, or a powerful wind. 262 Tem is a long, flat wooden or stone bench. Rooms of ancient Maya palaces contained such benches arranged along their interior walls. The seating arrangements along these benches were determined by rank within the ruling hierarchy. 263 Literally “sitters, or means of sitting.” Thus the Xibalbans laughed again. They laughed until their insides hurt and their chests became cramped from their laughter.264 All the lords of Xibalba grabbed themselves and rolled around in their laughter. “Now just go to the house. Someone will come to deliver your torch265 and your cigars266 there at the sleeping place,” they were told. Thus they arrived in the House of Darkness. There was nothing but darkness inside that house. Then the Xibalbans gathered their thoughts: “Tomorrow we will merely sacrifice them. They only have to make a mistake and straightaway they will die by means of our gaming things that we use to play ball,” said the Xibalbans to each other. For their ball was merely a round blade. White Dagger267 was the name of the ball of Xibalba. Their ball was sharp, shattered bones pierced through the ball of Xibalba. Thus One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu entered into the House of Darkness. At length one came to give them their torch, which was already lit. It had been sent by One Death and Seven Death, along with cigars for each of them which had also already been lit. 264 Literally “serpent laughter.” Kumatz (serpent) is used here to refer to cramps in the body, an association still current among modern highland Maya. The lords of Xibalba thus laughed so hard that they were getting side aches. 265 These are pine wood torches. Such torches are still used today and are made from a very resinous pine wood called ocote in Spanish. The resin of the wood is easy to ignite and keeps the torch burning without rapidly consuming the wood itself. 266 Smoking tobacco is a very ancient Maya tradition and carries important religious significance. Stone carvings and painted codices frequently depict gods and humans smoking cigars that could be grotesquely huge in size. The English word “cigar” is likely derived from the verb sik'arik (to smoke). 267 The name of this dagger implies that it is a sacrificial knife (see p. 132; lines 2409-2410). These, then, were sent by the lords to One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu. They were seated cross-legged there in the darkness when the courier arrived to give to them their torch and their cigars. The torch was brightly burning when it arrived, and with it were lit each one of the cigars: “These are to be returned at dawn. They are not to be used up. Instead, they are to be collected again intact. Thus say the lords to you,” they were told. Therefore they were defeated. For they used up the torch as well as the cigars that had been given to them. Xibalba is crowded with trials, for there are many kinds of trials there. The first of these is the House of Darkness, where nothing but darkness exists within. The second is named Shivering House, for its interior is thick with frost. A howling wind clatters268 there. An icy wind whistles through its interior. The third is named Jaguar House, where there are nothing but jaguars inside. They bare their teeth, crowding one another, gnashing and snapping their teeth together. They are captive jaguars within the house. The fourth trial is named Bat House, for there are none but bats inside. In this house they squeak. They shriek as they fly about in the house, for they are captive bats and cannot come out. The fifth, then, is named Blade House,269 for there are only blades inside—row upon row of alternating blades that would clash and clatter there in the house. 268 The wind clatters because it is laden with frost and hail. The verb used refers to the sound of grains falling on a hard surface or hail falling on a roof. Thus there are many trials in Xibalba. One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu did not enter into them. These are merely the names of each of the houses of trial. Thus One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu came out and appeared before One Death and Seven Death: “Where are my cigars and my torch that were given to you last night?” they were asked. “We finished them off, O lord.” “Very well then, now your day is at an end. You are to die.” Thus they were lost. They were broken as well. “Here your faces shall be hidden, for you are to be sacrificed,” said One Death and Seven Death. Then they were sacrificed and buried. It was at the place named Crushing270 Ballcourt that they were buried. The head of One Hunahpu was cut off, while the rest of his body was buried with his younger brother. 269 These are blades made of either flint or obsidian, a dark volcanic glass that when properly flaked can produce a razor-sharp edge. Obsidian blades were a major trade item throughout the history of ancient Mesoamerica, being one of the principal materials used in weapons, cutting tools, mirrors, sacrificial knives, and bloodletting instruments. 270 Puk'b'al (Crushing). The root verb for puk'b'al has a variety of possible interpretations. It may mean “to crush, to grind to a very fine consistency, to kick up dust, to sift, to beat, to spill, to spread abroad, to scatter, to disentangle, or to card wool. Puk'b'al may thus refer to the dustiness of the ballcourt or the tendency to kick up dust during vigorous play. It may also imply that this ballcourt is where opponents are “ground down, beaten, or sifted.” This latter interpretation is intriguing, because “to crush” is often used in the text to refer to the destruction or violent death of people (pp. 85, 87-88, 291; lines 682, 743, 789, 801, 8454). Father Coto notes that a synonymous word for “to crush,” k'ajb'ik, refers specifically to human sacrifice, which is the likely implication here as well. It is also possible that the word should be read as pukb'al, which also has a variety of meanings depending on context. It means literally “to fall from overripeness or decay (fruit, flowers, teeth), or to be plucked out (hair, feathers).” Metaphorically the word when applied to humans means “crestfallen, melancholy, disdained, contemptible, or scorned.” In this case such an interpretation may refer to the humiliation and misery of those who lose in the ballcourt. Both interpretations may apply here considering the Maya’s fondness for plays on words and puns. Alternatively, the word may be a scribal error for puzbal (place of sacrifice), a reading which fits the context of this passage well. “Place his head in the midst of the tree that is planted by the road,” said One Death and Seven Death. Now when they went to place his head in the midst of the tree, the tree bore fruit.271 The tree had never borne fruit until the head of One Hunahpu was placed in it. This was the tree that we now call the calabash.272 It is said to be the head of One Hunahpu. One Death and Seven Death marveled at the fruit of the tree, for its round fruit was everywhere. Neither could the head of One Hunahpu be seen clearly, for his face had become identical in appearance with the calabashes. This was seen by all Xibalba when they came to look at it. In their hearts, they perceived the greatness of the essence of that tree, for it was accomplished immediately when the head of One Hunahpu entered into its midst. Thus the Xibalbans spoke one to another, “Let no one cut the fruit, nor enter beneath the tree,” they said. 271 Contemporary Tz'utujil burial practices at Santiago Atitlán may be related to this mythic account. Once placed in the grave, Atitecos raise a small mound of earth over the body and plant a tree on top which represents the soul of the dead reborn to new life. The community cemetery has long rows of graves bearing trees, giving the appearance of a great orchard or grove. Ximénez described a similar practice in highland Guatemala at the beginning of the eighteenth century and noted that persons were frequently buried in the maize fields, an indication that the dead were reborn as maize (1929-1931, I, 100). This is particularly significant with regard to Atiteco traditions of one of their principal culture heroes, Francisco Sojuel, who is believed to have set the pattern for many of the contemporary ritual practices observed today: “When Francisco Sojuel was being persecuted by his enemies they tried to kill him by cutting him into little pieces and sprinkling them with lemon juice and salt. But when they came back the next day they found that his coffin was empty and from it grew a griant zapote tree filled with fruit. People plant zapote trees over the graves of their family in memory of Francisco Sojuel because he did not die” (Christenson 2001, 207). The association between ancestors and fruit trees is also characteristic of ancient Maya thought. The sides of the sarcophagus of K'inich Janab Pakal at Palenque depict ten of the king’s ancestors emerging out of a cleft in the groundline marked with kaban (earth) signs. Behind each ancestor is a fruit-bearing tree, indicating that they are rising from their graves in a fashion parallel to the sprouting of world trees (Schele and Freidel 1990, 221; McAnany 1995, 43). 272 The calabash tree (Crescentia cujete) yields a large gourd with a hard, bonelike rind that is sometimes dried to make bowls. When dried, the gourd is whitish in color and approximately the size of a human skull. Thus they restricted themselves. All the Xibalbans restrained themselves. For the head of One Hunahpu was no longer clear, having become identical with the fruit of the tree whose name is the calabash. Great is the account of it. Now a maiden heard of it. Thus we shall now tell of her arrival there. THE MAIDEN LADY BLOOD AND THE TREE OF ONE HUNAHPU273 THIS, therefore, is the account of a maiden, the daughter of the lord named Gathered Blood. A MAIDEN, the daughter of a lord, had heard of it. Gathered Blood was the name of her father, while the name of the maiden was Lady Blood.274 When she heard the account of the fruit of the tree as told by her father, she was amazed by the tale: “Can I not come to know it by seeing the tree that has been spoken of? I hear that its fruit is truly delicious,” she said. Thus she went alone beneath the tree that was planted at Crushing Ballcourt:          “Ah! What is the fruit of this tree? Is not the fruit borne by this tree delicious? I would not die. I would not be lost. Would it be heard if I were to pick one?” asked the maiden. Then spoke the skull there in the midst of the tree: 273 lines 2268-2374 274 In Maya society, blood is the most precious substance because it bears within itself the spirit or essence of the ancestors and thus, by extension, of the founding deities from whom they descended. It is therefore the repository of life which transcends individuals to include the ancestral dead. It is consistent with this view that “Lady Blood,” daughter of an underworld lord, is the means by which the skull of One Hunahpu is able to produce new life out of death. “What is it that you desire of this? It is merely a skull, a round thing placed in the branches of trees,” said the head of Hunahpu when it spoke to the maiden. “You do not desire it,” she was told. “But I do desire it,” said the maiden. “Very well then, stretch out hither your right hand275 so that I may see it,” said the skull. “Very well,” said the maiden. And so she stretched upward her right hand before the face of the skull. Then the skull squeezed out some of its saliva, directed toward the hand of the maiden. When she saw this, she immediately examined her hand. But the saliva from the skull was not in her hand. “My saliva, my spittle, is merely a sign that I have given to you. This head of mine no longer functions, for it is merely a skull that cannot work.276 The head of a truly great lord has good flesh upon his face. But when he dies, the people become frightened because of his bones. In like manner, his son is like his saliva, his spittle. He is his essence. If his son becomes a lord, or a sage, or a master of speech, then nothing will have been lost. He will go on, and once more become complete. The face of the lord will not be extinguished nor will it be ruined. The warrior, the sage, the master of speech will remain in the form of his daughters and his sons.277 275 The Quichés associate the right side of the body with maleness and the left with femaleness. Lady Blood’s impregnation through her right hand is thus destined to produce male offspring. 276 I base this reading on chak (work), which is consistent with the previous phrase and thus serves as a couplet of ideas, the most common poetic form in the Popol Vuh. Sam Colop suggests that it should rather be ch'aq' (flesh), thus reinforcing the idea of a fleshless skull (Colop 1999, 68 n. 165). Either reading is consistent with the context of One Hunahpu’s discourse, and possibly it is meant to be a play on words. “Thus may it be so, as I have done to you. Climb, therefore, up there to the face of the earth. You will not die, for you have entered into a promise. Thus be it so,” said the skull of One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu. Now in this they merely carried out the thoughts and words of Huracan, Youngest Thunderbolt, and Sudden Thunderbolt. 277 Seeds are referred to as small bones or skulls in many highland Maya languages. The reverse is also true, human bones are seen as seeds, the source of new life as expressed in succeeding generations. Thus Schultze-Jena wrote, “when they [Quichés] ask for a young girl in marriage, they refer to progeny and make mention of human bones. It is probable that they have in mind the comparison of bones with the seeds of plants, and that human bones are bearers of life in the succession of the generations” (Schultze-Jena 1954, 52. Translation by author). Ruth Bunzel noted that the Quichés of Chichicastenango claimed that their formalized speech and ceremonies were attributed to ancient ancestral precedent and that this is a means of preserving the lives and knowledge of their ancestors: “And now this rite and custom belongs to the first people, our mothers and fathers.... This belongs to them; we are the embodiment of their rites and ceremonies” (Bunzel 1952, 232, 238). When performed at appropriate times and under appropriate circumstances, such ceremonies are perceived as a means for dead ancestors to manifest themselves. In Santiago Atitlán, a priest extracts certain garments that once belonged to the ancestors and wears them as he dances to the four cardinal directions to recreate the limits of the cosmos. Following the performance of this dance in 1998, the priest sought me out to ask if I had seen “the ancient nuwals [revered, powerful ancestors] giving birth to the world.” He explained that they had filled his soul with their presence as he danced, guiding him in his steps, and now everything was new again. In the eyes of the priest, the dance was not a symbol of the ancestral dance, but a genuine creative act in which time folded inward on itself to reveal the ancestors themselves (Christenson 2001, 24). In a more literal sense, highland Maya see their descendents as their “replacements.” Carlsen writes that much of Tz'utujil society is based on the principle of change as manifested in the transition from birth to death and back again (Carlsen 1991, 26; 1997, 50.55). Generational changes represent the transferral of life from the grandparents to their grandchildren. Thus when a baby is born, Tz’utujils say “he/she sprouted,” or “he/she returned,” implying that the spirit of a dead ancestor, like a newly-sprouted plant from the dead husk of a maize kernel, has returned to occupy a new body. In most highland Maya languages, the word for grandfather, mam, is also the word for grandchild, suggesting an equivalent relationship (Cook 2000, 257 n. 22, 260 n. 35). It is common for parents to name their children after their grandparents to reinforce this idea of substitution. Houston and Stuart also note that among the Classic Maya royal names tend to skip one or more generations, perhaps an allusion to this principle of generational substitution (Houston and Stuart 1996, 295). On a panel from Palenque now housed in the Dumbarton Oaks collection in Washington D.C., K’an Hok’ Chitam dances out of the underworld in the guise of the god Chak Xib Chak. He is named in the accompanying text as the k’exol (“replacement”) of an ancestor with the same name who died 92 years earlier (Schele and Miller 1986, 274). At Santiago Atitlán, this principle of substitution may be applied to single generation changes: “One’s child is sometimes actually addressed as ‘parent,’ and males will address their fathers as nuk’jol, or ‘my son.’ Likewise, a woman will often call her father wal, which translates as ‘child.’ As replacements are necessary for the grandparents’ regeneration, the k’ex naming pattern has more than superficial significance” (Carlsen 1997, 55). Thus the maiden returned again to her home, having been given many instructions. Straightaway her children were created in her womb278 by the mere saliva. Thus was the creation of Hunahpu and Xbalanque. Now when the maiden had arrived at her home and six moons were completed, she was noticed by her father, Gathered Blood by name. THE ASCENT OF LADY BLOOD FROM XIBALBA279 THEN the maiden was discovered280 by her father, for he saw that she was now with child. Thus all the lords, One Death and Seven Death along with Gathered Blood, gathered their thoughts: “This my daughter is with child, O lords. It is merely the result of her fornication,”281 said Gathered Blood when he met with the lords. “Very well then. Question her282 about this, and when she doesn’t tell, she will be sacrificed. She will go far away to be sacrificed.” “Very well, ye lords,” he replied. He therefore questioned his daughter: 278 The cycle of birth, death, and rebirth is one of the most prominent motifs in ancient Mesoamerican art and literature. The Maya saw death as a necessary part of life. For maize to grow and produce, a seed must first die and be buried in the earth. It was thus necessary for One Hunahpu to descend into the underworld to die before a new generation could appear and be capable of overcoming death. The maiden, Lady Blood, stood as an intermediary. As the daughter of one of the principal lords of death, she belonged to the darkness of the underworld. As the consort of One Hunahpu, she had the potential to create new life from death. 279 lines 2375-2509 280 Na'tajik is generally “to recall, remember,” but it may also refer to the discovery of something secret, a more appropriate reading for this context. 281 This is glossed by Basseta as “bastard.” 282 Literally “dig at her mouth.” This is a common Quiché expression for questioning or interrogating a person closely. Thus the father will try to dig the truth out of his daughter’s mouth. “Who is responsible for the child that is in your womb, my daughter?” he asked. “I have no child, my father,” she replied. “I have not known the face of any man.”283 “Very well then. It is true that you are a fornicator.”284 “Sacrifice her,285 you war councilors,” the four owls were told. “Then bring back her heart inside a bowl so that the lords may examine it this day.” And so they went, carrying the bowl and lifting up the maiden in their talons. They took with them the White Dagger, the instrument of her sacrifice. “You will not succeed in killing me, you messengers, for this that is in my womb was merely created and is not the result of fornication. Rather it is the result of my admiration for the head of One Hunahpu which is at Crushing Ballcourt. Thus do not sacrifice me, you messengers,” said the maiden when she spoke. “But what shall we give as a substitute for your heart? For we were told by your father, ‘Bring hither her heart so that the lords may examine it and be satisfied with its form. Bring hither the bowl quickly, and place her heart inside it.’ Were we not told this? 283 This is a polite expression for sexual intercourse. Quichés in traditional communities are very prudish when it comes to sexual matters, rarely referring to sex directly and seldom engaging in public displays of affection. Lady Blood’s statement is accurate both figuratively (she never having engaged in sexual intercourse) and also literally. As Tedlock points out, she never saw the living face of One Hunahpu, only his skull (D. Tedlock 1996, 262 n. 100). 284 Joxol ch'ek (scratcher knee). This is a play on words, a particularly prevalent Maya practice when referring to sexual things as a way of speaking about it indirectly. Jox is “to have sex,” and also “to hoe or to scratch.” A “knee scratcher” is a fornicator, prostitute, or one who wishes to seduce someone to have sex. The more common expression today is “leg burner” which also means seductress or prostitute. 285 Violations of custom with regard to adultery and other forms of illicit sex are considered very serious in traditional Quiché society, although in most cases punishment is left in the hands of the ancestors or deity: “The Quiché Indians have a firm belief and conviction that the ancestors punish adultery on behalf of the man, as well as his spouse if she tolerates it in her house, with sickness, affliction, and even death” (Schultze-Jena 1954, 23. Translation by author). Sexual transgressions in particular are believed to subject those involved to the whims of the lords of various illnesses who live in the underworld and who “feed” on the lives of those who do not live in accordance with societal rules. Therefore, what will we put in the bowl? For above all else, we do not want you to die,” said the messengers. “Very well. The heart will not be theirs. At the same time, your homes will no longer be here. No longer will you lure people by force to their deaths.286 Only the true fornicator will be subject to One Death and Seven Death. Mere croton tree sap287 will be theirs henceforth. Thus be it so. It will be this that you shall burn before their faces. It will not be this, the heart, that you will burn before their faces. Thus be it so. Take what the tree produces,” said the maiden. Then the red secretions288 of the tree were collected in the bowl. There it congealed and became round. The red tree, therefore, oozed forth the substitute for her heart. The sap of the red tree was thus like blood when it came out. It was the substitute for her blood.289 286 According to Basseta, chi'j is “to forcefully lure, lead away, or captivate.” 287 Thus the lords will receive not human blood, but rather the red sap of the croton tree (Croton sanguifluus; Spanish: Sangre de Dragón—Dragon’s Blood Tree). Vázquez de Espinosa wrote that “there is a tree in this province of Chiapa and of Guatemala that is called dragon. It is tall like the almond tree; the leaves are white and the stems are of the same color, and if it is struck with a knife it weeps blood, as natural as if it were human” (Vázquez de Espinosa 1969, 1st.I.iv.590, p. 147. Translation by author). Both blood and tree sap have the same name, kik', in Quiché. 288 Wa'l is the general Quiché term for the liquid secretions or fluid content of plants and animals. Thus u wa'l baq' wach (its secretions eyes) are tears, u wa'l pix (its fluid tomatoes) is tomato sauce, u wa'l alanxax (its fluid oranges) is orange juice, and here u wa'l che' (its secretions tree) is another word for tree sap. 289 Offerings, including blood sacrifices from chickens or turkeys, are still seen as “substitutes” for the offerer so that deity will not take them through illness or death (Bunzel 1952, 360). Landa wrote that in the Yucatec month of Mac, the pre-Conquest Maya “took out a great many of the hearts of the animals and birds and threw them into the fire to burn. And if they were unable to get large animals like tigers (jaguars), lions (pumas) or crocodiles, they made their hearts out of their incense; but if they had killed them, they brought their hearts for that fire” (Landa 1941, 163). It is likely that following the Spanish conquest, incense continued to represent a substitute for the blood sacrifice Precolumbian Maya once offered to deity. At the beginning of the eighteenth century Fray Antonio Margil recorded an incident in which a sick man consulted a Quiché shaman after falling ill in a forest. The shaman informed him that the “Lord of the Forest” had made him ill, but that there was a remedy: “Do not worry, because I go now to pray to the Lord of the Forest for you, and will take him his food [copal incense] in your name” (Hill 1992, 144). The Thus she collected the sap, the secretion of the red tree. Its surface became like bright red blood in the bowl when the maiden cut open the tree called the Sacrifice Red Tree.290 She named this “blood,” and blood croton it is still called. “There on the face of the earth you will be esteemed, for it is become yours,” she said therefore to the owls. “Very well then, you maiden. We shall go then upward to hide you. But first we shall give the substitute for your heart before the faces of the lords,” said the messengers. And so they arrived before the faces of the lords, who were all awaiting them expectantly.291 “Was it not successful?” asked One Death. “It was successful, O lords. This is surely her heart here in the bottom of the bowl.” “Very well. I would see it therefore,” said One Death. Then he lifted it up with his fingers,292 dripping with blood from its surface. It was bright red with blood. “Stir well293 the face of the fire and place it over the fire,” said One Death. shaman thus used incense to purchase the health of the man by offering it as a replacement to assuage the appetite of the Lord of the Forest. 290 Chuj is the Yucatec Maya word for “sacrifice.” If this is the correct reading of the word, it would serve as further evidence that significant elements of the early mythology recorded in the Popol Vuh have a lowland origin. Alternatively, if the word is to be read as ch'u'j, this is the Quiché word for the scarlet-colored dye made from the cochineal insect, Coccus axin. In this case, the word would modify kaq (red), indicating that it is a bright, vivid red. 291 Tz'elewachin is “to await, expect” (Coto). 292 Chuyej is “to lift something with one’s fingers” (Basseta). 293 Lu' is “to stir a fire to revive it” (Basseta). Then they dried it over the fire, while the Xibalbans savored its fragrance. They all rose up to lean over it, for truly delicious was the smell of the blood to them. Now while they were bent over, the owls went to guide the maiden up to the hole leading above the earth. Then the guides returned back down again. Thus the lords of Xibalba were defeated, for the maiden had tricked them all.294 LADY BLOOD AND THE MIRACLE OF THE MAIZE295 THIS, therefore, is the mother296 of One Batz and One Chouen. Then arrived the woman, Lady Blood by name, who came to the mother of One Batz and One Chouen. Her children were still in her womb, however, it wasn’t long before the birth297 of Hunahpu and Xbalanque. So then the woman came to the Grandmother. She said to the Grandmother: “I have come, thou lady,”298 she said when she arrived there with the Grandmother. “I am thy daughter-in-law and thy child,299 thou lady.” 294 Moywachixik (to be blinded faces) is a Quiché expression meaning “to be tricked, deceived.” 295 lines 2510-2663 296 Actually she is their grandmother, but because the real mother of One Batz and One Chouen had died by this time (p. 118; line 1913), Xmucane is acting as their mother. 297 Literally yake'ik (they arise), which is glossed as a metaphor for birth in Coto. 298 Chichu' (lady) simply means “woman, female.” It is most commonly used, however, in titles of respect, such as ajawinel chichu' (ruler female, queen) or alib' chichu' (parent-in-law female). 299 Traditionally, a new bride moves into the home of her mother-in-law, at least temporarily, to get acquainted and to ensure that she learns the skills necessary to run a household. By declaring herself to be the daughter-in-law and child of Xmucane, she is presenting herself as a claimant to familial hospitality. In contemporary Quiché households, marriage severs a woman permanently from her parent’s influence, suggesting that Lady Blood really had nowhere else to go: “When the girl leaves for her husband’s house, she takes with her nothing but her personal clothing.... Theoretically, the girl is now completely cut off from her blood kin. In going from her father’s side she forfeits her rights to inherit. She is discouraged from “From where have you come? Do my children yet exist? Did they not die in Xibalba? Only these two are left as their sign and their word.300 One Batz and One Chouen are their names. If you see that you have come, go back the same way,”301 the maiden was told by the Grandmother. “But it is true that I am thy daughter-in-law. These are surely his. These that I am carrying belong to One Hunahpu. One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu are alive. They are not dead. That which they have done is merely a manifestation of their light,302 thou mother-in-law. Thus you shall see it. You shall see his face in these that I am carrying,” she told the Grandmother. Now One Batz and One Chouen gloried in these things:303 Only the flute and song did they do. Only writing and carving was their work every day. And so they comforted the heart of the Grandmother. Thus the Grandmother spoke to her: “I do not want you. You are not my daughter-in-law. It is merely the result of your fornication that is in your womb. You are a deceiver. My children that you spoke of have died,” the Grandmother said again. “They are truly his, I say to you.” visiting her parents, and her relations with her family assume a purely formal character. It is assumed that she will never again return to their house” (Bunzel 1952, 28). 300 Both of these terms are also metaphors for “descendents, progeny.” 301 Edmonson sees this as a humorous response to the common Maya greeting, “I have arrived” (Edmonson 1971, 81 nn. 2451-2452). The polite response is “you have arrived,” but in this case, the grandmother turns the answer around and orders her to go away. 302 “Merely his self-manifestation light.” In other words, One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu will show themselves once again in the light when their sons are born. “To appear in the light” is a common Quiché metaphor for birth. 303 Literally “inflames,” with the implication that it gives glory, power, majesty. “Very well then, I hear you that you are my daughter-in-law,” the maiden was told. “Go then to get food that these may eat. Go and harvest a great netful of maize and return with it.304 Then you will surely be my daughter-in-law, just as you have said.” “Very well,” she replied. Then she went to the maizefield305 that belonged to One Batz and One Chouen, along the path that had been cleared by them. The maiden thus started out and arrived there at the maizefield. But there was only a single ear306 of maize307 in the field. There was not even one or two or three more. Although there was maize there, it was but a single ear that had been produced. Then the heart of the maiden sank:308 “See, I am a sinner!309 I am a debtor!310 Where shall I obtain the netful of food that is asked for?” she asked. 304 It is customary in Quiché society for a new bride to be given heavy tasks by her in-laws to prove her ability to provide for a family. In this case, Lady Blood is given a great net which is to be used to carry the maize for the family’s food. In Maya theology, the net is a significant symbol for the divine order of the universe. Its fixed pattern represents the regularity of the seasons in the fabric of time. Thus Maya goddesses are often depicted weaving on a cosmic loom. 305 Ab'ix may refer to the maizefield or a single maize plant, as in line 2604. 306 Wi' (head). The Maya think of ears of maize as “heads.” 307 Jal is an ear of maize, dry and ready to harvest. 308 Literally “finished therefore her heart.” 309 Makol (sinner). Modern Quiché prayers and ceremonies generally begin with a long litany of sacred beings and objects who are invoked to be present. This is followed by the phrase sacha' la nu mak (take away my sin), often repeated several times. This is not a reference to specific sins, but a request to take away any flaws in the body or character of those present that might taint the results of the ceremony. I recorded this prayer by an aj q'ij priest at a healing ceremony in Momostenango in the late 1970s: “We call upon you Earth, we ask you Lord of the Day 11 No'j, we ask you Lord 5 No'j... We ask a favor of you; we ask you a favor because there is sickness among us, there is a sick little girl. Take away my sin, King of the World, Savior of the World, so that you may speak—the Seven Skies, the Seven Earths. Take away my sin that there may be light, that there may be clarity. Take away my sin I ask you, the great mountains and the small mountains; the great plains and the small plains; the great animals who are lords of the mountains and you small animals who are in the mountains. Take away my sin, our people, our mothers and fathers, our Thus she called upon the guardians of the food: “Come, arise. Come, stand up Lady of the Day Toh,311 and Lady of the Day Canil,312 Lady Cacao313 and Lady of the Day Tzi,314 you the guardians of the food of One Batz315 and One Chouen,” said the maiden. grandmothers and our grandfathers. Take away my sin and witness us here today at this table. It has its service, to bring out the transformation, to bring out the mother-fathers. This is its service. Take away my sin.” 310 K'asb'ol. According to Father Coto, qazbal means “sinner, transgressor, debtor” In modern usage, the term refers to a person who is indebted to someone else, either financially or socially. This is perhaps the reason why the day name Toj is listed first in the following passage, a day associated with the payment of debts. Coto also lists qazbol macol, obviously related in some way to the paired couplet here, and notes that the two words taken as a pair refer to the merchant trade. 311 This passage likely refers to female manifestations of three of the days in the traditional highland Maya calendar—Toj, Q'anil, and Tz'i' (Ruud van Akkeren, personal communication). These are consecutive days, although the order should be Q'anil, Toj, and then Tz'i'. Modern aj q'ij priests invoke the days of the calendar in their prayers and ceremonies as lords and attribute to them specific power to bless or to punish. Thus they conceive of the days as living beings with personalities and specific spheres of influence. Toj is “tribute or payment.” Metaphorically it may also be “punishment or illness” caused by sin. In her note on Toj, as one of the named days in the traditional Quiché calendar, Ruth Bunzel quotes an aj q'ij priest collaborator: “T'oj (enfermedad, sickness). Symbolizes the suffering which is caused by sin. ‘This is a bad day, a day of sickness. On the day t'oj one burns incense in the house for the Lord of Sickness. T'oj is also a day for calling sickness to punish an enemy. If divination comes out in 7 qanil, 8 toj, 9 ts'i' it is bad. These are bad days. The content of qanil is corn, or the milpa, toj is sickness, ts'i', “dog,” some shameless act. When one has a sickness of the body that is like a worm eating the flesh, we call this xu jut qanil, which is a worm that is found sometimes in the milpa [maizefield]. When this worm gets into the body and eats at the flesh then it is because of these days. For this sickness comes from stealing corn or else it may be due to sorcery, for they are the days of sorcery also. For instance, if a man finds that his milpa has been robbed he goes to his milpa at midnight, breaks off an ear of corn and places a candle between the two halves, and asks San Jacinto and San Augustín, the patrons of the milpa to punish the robber, and he calls the days 7 qanil, 8 t'oj, 9 ts'i' to punish him. Then after a time the man who has stolen the corn will suffer from this disease, which is like cancer and ulcers. This is the meaning of these days” (Bunzel 1952, 282-283). 312 Q'anil, Literally “Yellowness,” referring specifically to the yellow of ripe maize, and is sometimes used as a metaphor for the fruitfulness of the earth in general. Bunzel: “Qanil (milpa, cornfield). Symbolic of the regeneration of the earth, of rebirth after, death, as exemplified in the growth of corn. ‘Qanil is the day of the milpa, a good day. It is a day to give thanks for one’s siembres [plantings], for harvest and planting. After the harvest one waits for the day qanil, either 2 or 3 qanil, to give thanks. And likewise after planting. This is optional. But it is obligatory for all people to give thanks for their food and their land on the day 8 qanil. And each year one does this, until one dies’” (Bunzel 1952, 55, 282). Barbara Tedlock adds that one of the mnemonics used for this day by aj q'ij priests in Momostenango is cak'anaric uwäch ulew (“harvest”—literally, “the face of the earth becomes yellow”), and adds that “on these days, the lineage priest-shaman, depending on whether planting or harvest time is closer, passes seeds saved from the previous year, or else fresh corn ears that have been chosen as seed ears for the next year, through the copal smoke. In so doing, he is symbolically feeding (tzukunic) both the Mundo [Spanish “World,” the principal earth deity] and his own ancestors” (B. Tedlock 1982, 114). Then she took hold of the cornsilk, the cornsilk atop the ear of ripe maize,316 and pulled it upward. She did not pick the ear of maize, but it multiplied there in the net until the great net overflowed. Then when the maiden returned, the animals carried the net for her as she returned. But when she arrived and saw her grandmother, they gave back her pack frame,317 and she perspired as if she had carried it. Now when the Grandmother saw the food, the great netful, she said: “Where did you come by this food? From where was it stolen? I will surely go to see if you have finished off the maize plant and brought it all here,”318 said the Grandmother. 313 Kakaw is the true cacao (Theobroma cacao) from which chocolate is made. Cacao was highly prized in Precolumbian Mesoamerica, where it was used to make a spiced chocolate beverage. So precious was the bean of the cacao that it was used as the most common form of currency in purchasing goods and services. Ruud van Akkeren (personal communication) notes that one of the prime areas of cacao cultivation in the region is Tiquisate/Nahualate on the Pacific coast. This is also the area of the Toj and Q’anil lineages. Several highland Maya documents mention the taking of women as captives from these lineages. There are also several terra cotta renderings of women with cacao pods growing from their body found in this area that are now located in the Popol Vuh Museum in Guatemala City. 314 Tz'i'a (Dog) is a metaphor for shamelessness. Bunzel: “T'si' (chucho, dog). This symbolizes sin, especially sexual impurity. ‘t'si', ‘dog,’ a bad day, the worst of all. The day of shameless and beastly actions (especially sexual). This is the meaning of t'si' in the divinations. There are no ceremonies for this day, because it is evil. But if one wishes to ask forgiveness of one’s evil acts, one asks it on the next day (9 bats)’” (Bunzel 1952, 283). 315 Perhaps it is not a coincidence that the day immediately following Q'anil, Toj, and Tz'i', is B'atz' in the traditional calendar. 316 Jal is a dried ear of maize ready to be harvested. 317 Ko'k is a wooden boxlike frame used to haul things on the back. 318 It is still customary among contemporary Quichés to carry harvested maize in large nets and to bring them home at one time wherever possible: “The whole harvest from a field is brought in at one time even if extra laborers must be hired to carry it. If it must be carried any distance, the bearers run the whole way, shouting. When they enter the house, the owner and his wife meet them. When the harvest from the large estate of Don Náches, a wealthy Ladino was brought into his town house more than fifty bearers were hired for the occasion. They ran into town in single file, shouting, encircled the plaza before taking the corn to the owner’s house, and the church bells were rung” (Bunzel 1952, 51). The arrival of the harvested maize is always an important event, even in smaller households. This episode suggests that Lady Blood had brought an entire harvest, though the Grandmother knew that no such field of maize existed in her family’s plot. Thus she went to see the maize plant. But there was the single ear of maize still on the maize plant, and it was clear where the net had been placed beneath it. The Grandmother thus rushed back to her home and said to the maiden: “This is but a sign that you are in truth my daughter-in-law. I will surely watch your deeds, for they that are to be my grandchildren are enchanted already,” the maiden was told. HUNAHPU AND XBALANQUE IN THE HOUSE OF THE GRANDMOTHER319 NOW we shall relate the tale of the birth of Hunahpu and Xbalanque. THIS, therefore, is the account of their birth that we shall tell. When the day arrived, the maiden Lady Blood gave birth. The Grandmother did not see it when they were born, for these two arose320 suddenly. Hunahpu and Xbalanque were their names. They arose in the mountains, but when they were taken into the house they did not sleep: “Take them away and abandon them, for truly shrill are their mouths,” said the Grandmother. Thus they were placed on an anthill, and there they slept blissfully. Then they were taken out again and placed on a thornbush. This was done by One Batz and One Chouen, for they would have had them die there on the anthill and on the thornbush.321 They wanted this because of the treachery322 and jealousy323 of One Batz and One Chouen. 319 lines 2664-2899 320 Xeyake'ik (they arose). This is a metaphor for birth according to Coto. 321 This treatment of the twin sons of One Hunahpu and Lady Blood is a serious breach of highland Maya attitudes toward children, particularly infants. Despite poverty and private concerns, children are always accepted as a “gift” in Quiché homes and treated with patience and indulgence. Infants and small Thus at first their younger brothers were not accepted in the house. They were not known. Therefore they just grew up in the mountains. Now One Batz and One Chouen were great flautists and singers. They had grown in greatness. They had passed through great affliction and misfortune, and thus they had become great. They were sages. They were not only flautists and singers, but they had also become writers and carvers. Everything they did was successful for them. For they knew of the circumstances of their birth, and certainly they were ingenious. They were the substitutes for their father who had gone to Xibalba and had died. Thus One Batz and One Chouen were great sages. In their hearts, they knew everything from the first, even before their younger brothers were created. But nothing ever came of these enchanted abilities324 because of their envy. The abuses325 born in their hearts merely fell upon their own backs and nothing came of them.326 children are never left alone under any circumstances. Whenever possible babies accompany their mothers, who carry them on their backs everywhere as they go about their work. Toddlers and small children are cared for solicitously by their older siblings who also carry them about wherever they go. “[Quichés] care for them tenderly and reproach themselves if the child falls ill. There is no infanticide; that would be a violation of all their moral ideas” (Bunzel 1952, 99). This attitude is so pervasive in highland Maya society that it is difficult to believe that it would have been otherwise at the time the Popol Vuh was composed. It is likely that the “treachery” of One Batz and One Chouen toward their half-brothers would have been recognized as sufficient grounds for the punishment they later received when they were turned into monkeys. It is significant in this regard that monkeys were earlier described as descendents of the wooden people who “did not possess their hearts nor their minds,” “walked without purpose,” “did not remember Heart of Sky,” and “were not capable of understanding” (pp. 83-90). It was the cold and dry hearts of the wooden people that had led to their ultimate destruction. 322 Ch'aqimal is “treachery, lies, calumny, slander, falsehood, or mockery.” Basseta wrote that it may also refer to the loud shouting of young men. In modern usage it suggests something that festers and spreads, such as an abscess, gangrene, or smallpox. 323 Literally “red or fiery countenance,” a common Quiché expression for jealousy. 324 Na'wikil is derived from the word for enchantment, or unusual power of knowledge. It is also used to refer to extraordinary abilities or talents. 325 Yoq' is an “abuse, insult, or affront.” Thus they were ignored327 by Hunahpu and Xbalanque, who went out every day to hunt with their blowguns. They were not loved by their grandmother, nor by One Batz and One Chouen. Nor were they given any food. When meals were prepared for them, One Batz and One Chouen would eat it all before they returned. But they did not become enraged328 or angry. They tolerated it, for they knew their own nature, and this was a light by which they could see. Thus when they returned each day, One Batz and One Chouen would take away their birds and eat them. They did not give anything to the twins, Hunahpu and Xbalanque. One Batz and One Chouen merely played the flute and sang. 326 Tedlock’s Quiché collaborator, Andrés Xiloj, commented on this passage: “We see a person; we speak behind his back and he doesn’t hear what we are murmuring. Then this murmur doesn’t fall upon that person, but we are the ones who pay for it” (Tedlock 1996, 265 n. 105). Bunzel recorded the following explanation from a Quiché seeking justice from a slander inflicted on him: “Now I have a clean heart, my wife is satisfied, and the woman also has set everything right. Now I can go before the ancestors to ask justice. But if I go before them with my sins still upon me, and quarreling with my wife or relatives, then I shall die at once, before my enemy, for the justice which I ask for him will fall upon me” (Bunzel 1952, 376). 327 The root of this verb is derived from poy, which has been used previously to describe the wooden effigies that were destroyed. Today the word is used for scarecrows, dolls, or statues. Each of these is something that resembles reality but is false. Basseta writes it is to be “discounted, ignored, displeased, dissatisfied” as well as to be “perverted, corrupted.” 328 Literally “inflamed.” The tolerance of the twins to the injustice of their older siblings is characteristic of Quiché practice. There are certainly rivalries among family members. Bunzel noted that the calm that prevails in all households is somewhat superficial, often hiding bitterness and discord with a “smooth surface of respectful courtesy” (Bunzel 1952, 12). Particularly among older family members, there is often an atmosphere of intense rivalry and mistrust. This antagonism seldom if ever erupts into open conflict, however, for fear of retribution from deceased ancestors who do not tolerate such behavior: “The ancestors and ‘the idols’ stand ready to punish the blows or harsh words that violate the sanctity of the house. The injured ‘weep before the idols’ demanding revenge, and the ever present fear of sorcery stays the free expression of antagonism. Within the house quiet and dignity prevail. All intercourse is marked by elaborate etiquette” (Ibid., 120). Thus one of her collaborators who was preparing for a ceremony told her: “It is better that I go out of the house before I am provoked to retort. There is nothing I can do, I must not quarrel or argue. For I am asking justice before the spirits, and if I do anything, they will immediately drag me out of this life” (Ibid., 380). Children are seldom chastened by their parents in traditional Quiché households, but it is made clear from a very early age that open expressions of anger or physical abuse between siblings is not tolerated and that when it does occur such behavior invites retribution by the ancestors in the form of illness or even death. Then one day Hunahpu and Xbalanque returned without bringing any birds. The Grandmother was enraged because of this: “What is the reason that you have not brought any more birds?” Hunahpu and Xbalanque were asked. “This is why, our grandmother. Our birds are just stuck up in the top of the tree,” they said. “There is no way to climb to the top of the tree to reach them, our grandmother. Therefore we would like our older brothers to go with us to bring down the birds,” they said. “Very well,” said their older brothers. “We will go with you at dawn.” Thus they were defeated. The two of them had planned for the defeat of One Batz and One Chouen: “We shall merely overturn their nature. This is the essence of our words. Thus be it so, for great is the affliction that they have caused us. If it had been according to their desires, we, their younger brothers, would have died and been lost. In their hearts, we are looked upon as slaves, as if we worked for them. Instead, we shall make of them an example,” they said one to another. Thus they went there below the tree whose name is Yellow Tree,329 in company with their older brothers. As they went, they began to shoot with their blowguns, for there were innumerable birds in the top of the tree singing riotously. Their older brothers marvelled at this when they saw the birds. But not one of these birds that they saw fell down beneath the tree: 329 Can Te (Lowland Maya: Yellow Tree). Recinos (1950, 128 n. 6) and Campbell (1983, 82) identify this as Gliricidia sepium, known in Central America as Madre de cacao (Spanish: Mother of Cacao). The Maya extracted a yellow dye from this tree (Roys 1967, 161 n. 8). “Our birds do not fall down here. Just go and bring them down,” they said to their older brothers. “Very well,” they said. And they climbed up to the top of the tree. But the tree began to grow larger. It swelled in size. Thus when they wanted to come back down, One Batz and One Chouen couldn’t climb down from the top of the tree.330 They therefore called down from the top of the tree: “What can we say, our younger brothers? Take pity on us. This tree is truly frightening to see, our younger brothers,” they called down from the top of the tree. Thus Hunahpu and Xbalanque called back to them: “Loosen your loincloths331 and retie the long end below your bellies. Pull out the tail end332 behind you. Then you will be able to walk freely,” they were told by their younger brothers. “Fine,” they said. And so they pulled out the ends of their loincloths,333 and these immediately became tails. They appeared just like spider monkeys. Thus they went up into the tops of 330 Akkeren (2000, 65, 303-304) suggests that this tale is the origin of the famous Palo Volador in which dancers dressed as monkeys climb a tall pole, tie long ropes to their ankles, and spin downward as the ropes gradually unwind (Cook 2000, 107-118). In many communities this popular dance has been banned because of the danger involved. 331 Ximénez identifies we'x as short trousers worn by men, but likely they were loincloths prior to the Spanish conquest based on the description in the text of their being loosened and retied. Weexj is the name for the traditional white trousers worn in Santiago Chimaltenango (Watanabe 1992, 93) 332 This is a good example of a play on words. The text uses the term je' here to describe the end of the brothers’ loincloths. While je' may be used to refer to the end of something, it also means “tail,” presaging the transformation that would soon take place. 333 To'q. This word is still in use in the highlands as a generic term for underwear (Mondloch, personal communication). the trees there in the small mountains and the great mountains. They went out into the forests, howling and chattering loudly in the branches of the trees. Thus was the defeat of One Batz and One Chouen at the hands of Hunahpu and Xbalanque. It was merely by their enchantments that it was done. Now when they arrived back at their home, they spoke with their grandmother and mother: “Our grandmother, something has happened to our older brothers. Their faces have changed.334 They go about like animals now,” they said. “If you have done something to your older brothers, you will cause me misery and anguish. Let this not be what you have done to your older brothers, my grandsons,” said the Grandmother to Hunahpu and Xbalanque. They replied then to their grandmother: “Do not grieve, our grandmother. You shall see again the faces of our older brothers. They will come back. But this is a test for you, our grandmother. Please do not laugh, for we will test their fate,” they said. Thus they began to play the flute. They played “Hunahpu Spider Monkey” on the flute. 334 Rax ki wach (new their faces). This is a physical reality, in that the brothers now have monkey faces, but it also has a host of implied meanings. Basseta records that this suggests “without shame.” Coto adds that it refers to one that has “gone astray, lost self-control, is impudent, outside the bounds of justice, talks nonsense, babbles, or chatters.” THE FALL OF ONE BATZ AND ONE CHOUEN335 THEN they began to sing, to play the flute, and to play the drum.336 And when they had taken up their flute and their drum, the Grandmother sat down with them as well. Thus they played the flute, calling them with the music. In song they called out their names, with the music whose name is “Hunahpu Spider Monkey.” Then arrived One Batz and One Chouen, dancing as they came. But when the Grandmother looked at them, she saw their ugly faces337 and laughed, for she could not contain her laughter. Therefore they immediately went away. Their faces could not be seen anymore, for they had gone back into the forest. “What now will you do, our grandmother? We shall try it four times in all. Only three times more we shall call them with flute music and song. But you must truly contain your laughter when we try it again,” said Hunahpu and Xbalanque. Then they played the flute again, and again they came dancing in the middle of the house patio. Animatedly they did it, tempting their grandmother to laughter. Thus immediately the Grandmother began to laugh again. For the faces of the spider monkeys were truly funny. They were paunchy338 and naked below their chests.339 335 lines 2900-3023 336 Q'ojom is a general term for any kind of percussion instrument, although “drum” is the most common interpretation in colonial dictionaries. In most modern Quiché communities, the word refers to the marimba, which has become extremely popular but which most likely did not exist in Precolumbian Guatemala. The flute and drum are still the instruments used to accompany traditional native dances and processions. 337 Itzel u wach (evil his face) and k'ax u wach (painful his face) are common expressions used by the Quichés to describe an ugly person. 338 Xiririk –pam is “pot-bellied, big bellied, paunchy” according to Basseta. And when they came, she laughed a great deal, which made them depart again into the mountains. “Surely, what more can we do, our grandmother? This third time we shall try it again,” said Hunahpu and Xbalanque. Thus they played the flute again, and again they came dancing. But this time the Grandmother was able to contain well her laughter. They therefore scampered on the wall.340 Their mouths were very red, and their faces were foolish.341 Their mouths were puckered342 and bushy.343 Their faces were silly, and they snorted344 at them. Now when she saw this, the Grandmother again burst out laughing. Never again were their faces seen because of the laughter of their grandmother. “But this once more, our grandmother, we shall call upon them.” Thus for the fourth time they played their flutes again, but this time they did not come back. Instead they remained out in the forest. Thus they spoke to their grandmother: 339 A polite way of saying that their genitals were exposed. This is a sign of disgrace, or dishonor among the ancient Maya. 340 Tz'aq is a wall or a large building. 341 Tak denotes someone who is “foolish, stupid, crazy, hard of hearing, or quick to anger.” 342 Mutzuma'q is “rounded,” in this case describing the brothers’ mouths as similar to the appearance of monkeys when they pucker their lips. 343 Chik'imal (bushy) is used to describe unkempt or uncombed hair that sticks out away from the head or face. 344 Joq'ij is to make sounds through the nose. “We tried, our grandmother, and at first they came back. We have tried to call them back again. But do not grieve. We are your grandsons, and we are here. Just love345 our mother, O grandmother. “Our older brothers will be remembered. Thus be it so. They were given names and also given titles. One Batz and One Chouen shall be called upon,” said Hunahpu and Xbalanque. And since that time they have been called upon by the flautists and the singers. The ancient ones also called upon them, they who were the writers and the carvers.346 A long time ago, they became animals. They became spider monkeys because of their pride, for they had abused their younger brothers according to the dictates of their hearts. Thus they were ruined. One Batz and One Chouen were lost, becoming animals. Thus their community and their home is now among the flautists and the singers. For great were their accomplishments when they dwelt with their grandmother and their mother. 345 Loq'oj is to “love, esteem, appreciate, value, honor, or regard.” Thus the twins seek to replace the treachery and jealousy of the household with love and respect. In Quiché view, this is not merely the establishment of a more comfortable home environment, but an essential prerequisite for the proper expression of divine will. In contemporary Quiché thought, ancestors and deity do not tolerate open anger, jealousy, or pride and punish such severely. Until these characteristics are eliminated from the house of their mother and grandmother, the twins would not be able to act in concert with Heart of Sky, identified in the text as the inspiration for the twins subsequent actions in defeating death and restoring their father/ancestor to power. Note that even in victory, Hunahpu and Xbalanque show a degree of honor and respect for the legitimate accomplishments and titles of their older siblings, acknowledging that they will be remembered. 346 Las Casas wrote that in the early Colonial period, these two brothers were the patrons of all the arts: “All the skilled artisans, such as painters, featherworkers, carvers, silversmiths, and others like them, worshiped and made sacrifices to those younger sons called Huncheven and Hunahan, so that they would grant them the skill and mastery to carry out their work in an accomplished and perfect way; but although they worshiped them as divine men, they were not held as gods in general, nor superior to all others” (Las Casas 1967, III.ccxxxv, 506. Translation by author). HUNAHPU AND XBALANQUE IN THE MAIZEFIELD347 THEN they began again to accomplish their deeds, to manifest themselves before the face of their grandmother and before the face of their mother. First they worked the maizefield: “We are going to farm the maizefield, our grandmother and our mother,” they said. “We are the substitutes for our older brothers,” said Hunahpu and Xbalanque. Thus they took up their axes and their hoes,348 carrying them on their shoulders. Each of them also shouldered his blowgun and departed their home, having first left instructions with their grandmother to bring their food: “At midday come to give us our food, grandmother,” they said. “Very well then, my grandsons,” said their grandmother. Then they arrived there to farm the maizefield. They merely stuck the hoe into the ground, and it truly began to plow the earth. All by itself the hoe did the plowing for them. As for the axe, they just stuck it into the fork349 of a tree, and by its own strength it would fell it. Thus the one axe chopped and felled all the trees and bushes, feverishly working to cut down the trees all by itself. Now this, the hoe, would break up countless stalks and briars. Just the one hoe would clear countless mountains, both small and great, as it went. 347 lines 3024-3272 348 Mixk'ina'. A wooden hoe according to Basseta. 349 Literally the “armpit” of the tree. Then they gave instructions to an animal, Turtle Dove by name. Hunahpu and Xbalanque placed it atop a great stump and spoke to it: “When you see our grandmother coming to bring our food, immediately cry out that she has arrived. Then we will take up the hoe and the axe.” “Very well,” said the Turtle Dove. Thus they merely hunted with their blowguns. They didn’t truly farm the maize. And when the Turtle Dove cried out, they came quickly, the one taking up the hoe while the other one took up the axe. They would then put field debris on their heads and rub dirt on their hands. The one would dirty his face as if he had truly farmed the maizefield, while the other one would scatter wood chips on his head as if he had truly been cutting down trees. In this way they were seen by the Grandmother, and thus they were given to eat. They did not truly farm the maize, and so it was unmerited that she went to give them their food. And when they returned home they would say, “We are truly tired, our grandmother.” And they would rub and stretch their legs and arms in front of their grandmother to deceive her. But on the second day, they arrived at the maizefield to find that all the trees and bushes had been raised up again. All the stalks and briars had again fastened themselves together. “Who is playing tricks on us?”350 they asked therefore. 350 Literally “who is plucking at us?” Metaphorically this is to deceive or to play a trick on someone, although not in a playful way. Now it was all the animals, both great and small, that had done it—the puma and the jaguar, the deer and the rabbit, the fox and the coyote, the peccary and the coati, the small birds and the great birds. These had done it. In a single night they did it. Thus they began again to farm the maize. Again the earth was broken up. The trees were cut down. There they gathered their thoughts, over by the cut trees and the broken ground: “We will just watch over our maizefield tonight, and thus we will discover whatever it was that has done this,” they said when they gathered together their thoughts. So when they returned to the house, they said: “Someone perhaps has been playing tricks on us, our grandmother. When we arrived a while ago at our maizefield, we found that it had become a great field of grass and a great forest once again,” they said to their grandmother and their mother. “Therefore we shall go back and watch over it by night. For it is not good what has been done to us,” they said. Thus they concealed themselves. They went out again to cut down the trees, and then they hid themselves there, taking cover. At length all the animals gathered together, coming together351 as one. All the small and great animals arrived in the very heart of the night,352 chattering as they came. And this was their speech: “Arise trees; arise bushes,” they said when they came. Thus they congregated beneath the trees and the bushes, emerging where they could be seen before their faces. 351 This is to join together disparate pieces, or gather in a mixed group. 352 Literally “zenith its heart night,” meaning midnight. The first of these were the puma and the jaguar. The boys wanted to grab them, but they would not give themselves up. Then emerged the deer and the rabbit. They grabbed them by their tails, but these just broke off, leaving the tail of the deer behind in their hands along with the tail of the rabbit. Thus they still have shortened tails.353 Neither would these give themselves up—the fox or the coyote, the peccary or the coati. All the animals just passed on by in front of Hunahpu and Xbalanque. Thus their hearts were troubled because they weren’t able to catch any of them. But one more came along behind all the rest. He scurried when he came, and they netted him. They snared the rat in a net. They caught him and squeezed him behind the head. According to their desire, they strangled him and burned his tail over a fire. Because they did this to the tail of the rat, their tails still do not have hair on them. And their eyes are the way they are because the boys, Hunahpu and Xbalanque, strangled him. “I must not die by your hands. Your task is not to be maize farmers. But there is something that is yours,” said the rat. “Where is that which is ours? Speak then,” the boys said to the rat. “Will you first let me go?” asked the rat. “My word is here in my belly.354 I will tell it to you if you first give me a little food.” “We will give you your food later, but tell us first,” he was told. 353 The Guatemalan varieties of the white-tailed deer (Odocoileus americana) and cottontail rabbit (Sylvilagus floridanus yucatanicus) both have short tails. They are paired in this couplet because they were the most commonly hunted game animals in the Maya area. 354 The implication is that the rat’s information cannot be expressed until his belly has been satisfied with something to eat. “Very well then. It is what belonged to your fathers, One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu by name, who died in Xibalba. They left behind their gaming things hanging above the house355—their yokes, their arm protectors, and their rubber ball as well. Your grandmother did not show these to you, for it was because of them that your fathers died.” “Is it not true? Do you truly know this?” the boys asked the rat. Thus they rejoiced in their hearts when they heard from the rat the news about the rubber ball. This, therefore, was given to the rat as his food—grains of maize, squash seeds, chili peppers, beans, pataxte, and cacao. “These, then, are yours. If anything has been swept out with the trash and has become exposed, then it is yours. You shall gnaw on it,” said Hunahpu and Xbalanque to the rat. “Very well then, boys. But what will I say if your grandmother sees you?” he asked. “Don’t be disheartened,”356 they said to the rat. “We are here. We know what to say to our grandmother. We will lift you up onto the corner of the house to fetch them. 355 This would be the rafters beneath the roof. This is a common place for storing tools, old clothing, and harvested maize. I have passed many a night sleeping in the “maize loft” as a guest in Quiché homes. The rat would know lofts are storage places since rats are to be found in every loft I have ever been acquainted with. On cold nights, they like to share bedding as uninvited sleeping companions. 356 Literally “may it not fall your heart.” Straightaway you will go up to where the things are hanging. We will be able to see it in the rafters of the house, reflected in our sauce.”357 Thus Hunahpu and Xbalanque gathered their thoughts and instructed him all night. And when it was truly midday,358 they arrived. HUNAHPU AND XBALANQUE DISCOVER THE GAMING THINGS359 THE rat they carried could not be seen clearly when they arrived. While one went into the house, the other went around to the corner of the house and immediately lifted up the rat. Then they asked their mother for their food: “Just prepare for us a bite to eat,” they said. We desire chili sauce, our grandmother.” Thus their bite was prepared, and a plate of sauce was placed before them. But this was just a trick they were playing on their grandmother and their mother. They drained the water jug dry: “We are truly thirsty. Bring us something to drink,” they said to their grandmother. “All right,” she replied. Thus she left, leaving them behind to eat. But it was not true that they were hungry. It was merely a deception so that they could see the rat reflected in their chili 357 Ti' (bite) as in a bite to eat. This refers to a snack, rather than a full meal. This turns out to be a bowl of mashed chili sauce. 358 Literally “zenith sun.” 359 lines 3273-3338 sauce. There the rat was, behind the rubber ball where it hung above the house. This they saw reflected in their chili sauce. Then they sent forth a mosquito. The mosquito is an insect similar to a small biting fly.360 It went to the river and pierced the front of the Grandmother’s jug. Thus the water that she had raised leaked out from the front of the jug. Try as she might, the face of the jug would not be sealed.361 “What is our grandmother doing? We are gasping for water. We are parched with thirst!” they said to their mother. Thus they sent her away. Then the rat clawed at the ropes that held the rubber ball from the thatch roof above the house until it fell, along with the yokes, the arm protectors, and the leathers. They carried them away and hid them along the road leading to the ballcourt. Then they went back to where their grandmother was at the river, and there they found their grandmother and mother busily trying to seal the face of the jug. Thus they arrived at the river, each carrying his blowgun: “What have you been doing? Our hearts became weary, so we came,” they said. “Look at the front of my jug. It cannot be sealed off,” replied their grandmother. 360 Us. Both xa'n (mosquito) and us may refer to mosquitos, but they can also be the small biting flies that congregate on the banks of rivers. 361 The ancient lowland Maya worshiped an aged female deity named Ixchel (Goddess O of the codices), who is often depicted with a jug from which she pours out water in the form of rain. Ixchel was also a patroness of medicine, fertility, childbirth, midwifery, and the art of divination. The grandmother goddess Xmucane was apparently the Quiché equivalent of Ixchel, associated with the powers of creation (pp. 60.62; line 35), divination (pp. 79-82; lines 569-599), midwifery (p. 62; lines 32, 38), medicine (p. 99; lines 1112-1119), childbirth (p. 113; lines 1736-1742), and now the leaking water jug. Immediately then they sealed it, and together they returned once more, leading the way before their grandmother. Thus was the discovery of this rubber ball. THE SUMMONS OF HUNAHPU AND XBALANQUE TO XIBALBA362 AND so they went rejoicing as ballplayers to the ballcourt. For a long time they played ball there alone, sweeping clear the ballcourt of their father. Then the lords of Xibalba heard it: “Someone has begun to play again over our heads. Have they no shame, stomping about up there? Did not One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu die when they desired to puff themselves up before us? Go then to summon them here once again,” said One Death and Seven Death, along with all the lords. “Summon them here,” they said to their messengers. “Tell them, ‘They must come, say the lords. Here we shall play ball with them. In seven days, we will play, say the lords.’ Tell them this when you arrive there,” the messengers were told. Thus they came along the great cleared pathway, the road that led to the home of the boys. The messengers pursued363 them into the home of the Grandmother, but the boys were still playing ball when the messengers of Xibalba arrived. “The lords say, ‘They must surely come,’” said the messengers of Xibalba. Then the messengers of Xibalba set the date: “In seven days, they will be expected.” Such was the word left with Xmucane. 362 lines 3339-3469 363 Toq'oj is to pursue with the intention of importuning, persecuting, harassing, or vexing someone. “Very well then,” replied the Grandmother. “They shall go as summoned, you messengers.” Thus the messengers returned again, leaving the Grandmother heartbroken: “How shall I tell my grandsons of their summons? Were these not truly from Xibalba? They are just like the messengers who arrived in the past when their fathers went away to die,” said the Grandmother. Thus she wept bitterly in the house alone. Then a louse fell down on her. It itched, so she picked it up and put it in her hand. The louse scuttled as it went along. “My grandchild,” she asked the louse, “would you like me to send you to summon my grandsons at the ballcourt?” Thus he left as a summoner with this message: “Messengers have arrived with your grandmother saying that you are to come. The messengers of Xibalba declare, ‘In seven days you are to come,’ says your grandmother.” Such was the message given to the louse. And so he went, scuttling along the way. Now sitting in the road was a youthful toad by the name of Tamazul.364 “Where are you going?” asked the toad of the louse. “I am going to give the boys a message that is in my belly,” said the louse to Tamazul. 364 The name Tamazul is derived from the Nahuatl tamasolli (toad), perhaps indicating a Central Mexican origin for portions of this tale. “Very well then, but I see that you are not going very fast,” the toad said to the louse. “Wouldn’t you like me to swallow you? Then you would see how fast I could go. We would get there quickly.” “Very well,” said the louse to the toad. Thus he was licked up by the toad, who went hopping along his way. But he did not go fast. Presently, he was met by a great snake whose name was White Life.365 “Where are you going, boy Tamazul?” asked White Life. “I am a messenger with a message in my belly,” said the toad to the snake. “But I see that you aren’t going very fast. Perhaps I would arrive there more quickly,” said the snake to the toad. “Go right ahead,” he was told. Thus the toad was swallowed up by White Life. The snake, then, received his food and they still swallow toads today. Now this snake went quickly along his way. Then again the snake was met by the falcon, a great bird.366 And the snake was swallowed by the falcon.367 Then he arrived 365 Saqiq'as is identified as a large snake by Varea. 366 Wak. The name of this bird is closely related to the Nahuatl word for falcon, oactli. It is likely the bird known as the Laughing Falcon (Herpetotheres cachinnans), which makes a sound similar to this call (Tedlock 1996, 270 n. 114). Bassie-Sweet points out that the call of the laughing falcon is an indication of the coming of the rains in Mesoamerica (personal communication). She suggests that the twins’ clearing of the maize field implies the dry season when the fields are cleared for burning. The subsequent descent into Xibalba would coincide with this period of death and sterility. The call of the laughing falcon may presage the return of rain and agricultural rebirth. 367 This humorous story may have prophetic significance as well. The louse represents corruption and decay. The toad is associated with the watery underworld and the fertility of the earth’s interior as a source of renewal. The serpent is a common symbol of regeneration because of its tendency to periodically shed its old skin to uncover a new one. Finally, the falcon is a common symbol of the reborn sun at dawn. Thus the sequence of animals may presage the death and corruption of the twins in the underworld, followed by their rebirth to new life and apotheosis as the sun and moon. Literally then, death would be swallowed up by the ultimate triumph of Hunahpu and Xbalanque. atop the ballcourt. Thus the hawk received his food, so that he still eats snakes in the mountains. When the falcon arrived, he alighted atop the edge of the ballcourt while Hunahpu and Xbalanque were rejoicing and playing ball. Then the falcon cried out: “Wak-ko! Wak-ko!” was the cry of the falcon. “What is that which is crying out? To our blowguns!” they said. HUNAHPU AND XBALANQUE RECEIVE THE SUMMONS TO XIBALBA368 SO then they shot the falcon. The pellet from the blowgun buried itself straight into his eye,369 knocking him down. Thus he fell, and they went out to grab him and question him: “Why have you come?” they asked the falcon. “I have a message in my belly.370 But surely you must first cure my eye, and then I will tell it,” said the falcon. “Very well then,” they replied. So they took off a little of the surface of their rubber ball and put it in the face of the falcon.371 This they called Sliced Rubber. Immediately he was cured by them, making good again the sight of the falcon. 368 lines 3470-3556 369 This is a play on words in the original Quiché, since “eye” is u b'aq' u wach (its pellet or seed his face). 370 The irony is that this expression is literally true, since the message is contained in the animals that he had swallowed. 371 The laughing falcon has a black patch around the eyes. “Tell it then,” they said to the falcon. Thus he vomited the great snake. “Speak!” they said again to the snake. “All right,” he replied. And so he vomited the toad. “What is your errand? Speak!” the toad was told. “My message is here in my belly,” said again the toad. Then he tried to throw up, but he did not vomit. His mouth just drooled. He tried, but nothing did he vomit. Thus the boys wished to beat him. “You are a deceiver,” he was told. Then they squashed his rear end with their feet, crushing the bones of his backside with their feet. Again he tried, but he just salivated at the mouth. So they pried open the mouth of the toad. It was pried open wide by the boys. They searched in his mouth and found that the louse was merely stuck in front of the toad’s teeth. He was just in his mouth. He hadn’t really been swallowed. It was merely as if he had been swallowed. Thus the toad was defeated. As a result, it is not obvious what food was given to him. He could not go fast; thus he merely became spoil for the snake. “Speak!” the louse was told. Thus he spoke his word: “The Grandmother says to you boys, ‘Go and summon them. Messengers have arrived from Xibalba, the messengers of One Death and Seven Death. ‘In seven days372 372 The number seven has ritual significance in Maya theology. In this case, it may refer to the seven levels of the earth that were believed to exist above the underworld (Thompson 1971, 214). Thus the twins were allowed a day to pass through each of these layers on their journey downward into Xibalba. It may they will come here to play ball with us. They must bring their gaming things—the rubber ball, yokes, arm protectors, and leathers. They will liven up this place, say the lords.’ ‘This is their word that has come,’ says your grandmother. ‘Thus you must come,’ the Grandmother truly says. Your grandmother weeps. She calls out that you must come.” “Is it not true?” they asked in their hearts when they heard this. And immediately they returned to advise their grandmother. THE DESCENT OF HUNAHPU AND XBALANQUE INTO XIBALBA373 “SURELY we must go, our grandmother. But first we will advise you. This is the sign of our word that we will leave behind. Each of us shall first plant an ear of unripe maize374 in the center of the house.375 If they dry up, this is a sign of our death. ‘They have died,’ you will say when they dry up. If then they sprout again, ‘They are alive,’ you will say, our grandmother and our mother. This is the sign of our word that is left with you,” they said. also refer to the seven sacred directions of the Maya universe—the four cardinal directions plus the sky, center, and underworld. 373 lines 3557-3993 374 Aj. This is an ear of unripe maize, or maize that is still soft on the cob. Alternatively, it may also refer to the stalk of the maize plant. 375 Although this incident seems odd, it is consistent with the ancient Maya conception of the universe in which all creation is seen as a house. The four corners represent the cardinal directions while its walls and ceiling form the vault of the sky. The foundation posts thus form the boundaries of the underworld. The maize plant is often depicted as a divine axis mundi standing at the center point of the universe with its roots extending downward into the underworld while its stalk reaches into the sky. The ancient Maya often erected colossal stone monuments of their revered kings decorated with tree and maize elements to emphasize the rulers’ identity with this sacred living center. Thus the Quichés would see nothing odd in the twins identifying themselves with a maizestalk planted at the center of a divine household. Thus Hunahpu planted one, and Xbalanque planted another in the house. They did not plant them in the mountains or in fertile ground. It was merely in dry ground, in the middle of the interior of their home, that they planted them. Then they left, each with his blowgun, and descended to Xibalba. They quickly went down the steps, passing through various river canyons. They passed through the midst of many birds. “Flocks” was the name of the birds. And again they passed over Pus River and Blood River. In their hearts, the Xibalbans had intended these as traps. But they were not troubled. They just passed over them, floating on their blowguns. When they came to the four crossroads, they already knew the roads of Xibalba— the Black Road, the White Road, the Red Road, and the Blue/Green Road. Then they sent an insect named Mosquito. They sent him on ahead to obtain for them what he could hear: “You shall bite each one of them in turn. Bite the first one seated there and then keep on biting them until you have finished biting all of them. It will be truly yours then to suck the blood of people on the road,” the mosquito was told. “Very well then,” said the mosquito. So then he went along the Black Road until he alighted behind the effigies of carved wood. The first ones were all dressed up. He bit the first one, but there was no response. Then he bit the second one seated there, but he did not speak either. Next he bit the third one seated there, who was One Death—“Ouch!” said each one when he was bitten. “What?” was their reply: “Ow!” said One Death. “What, One Death? What is it?” “I am being bitten!” “It’s just . . . Ow! What was that? Now I am being bitten!” said the fourth one seated there. “What, Seven Death? What is it?” “I am being bitten!” Next, the one seated fifth said, “Ow! Ow!” “Flying Scab,” asked Seven Death, “what is it?” “I am being bitten!” he said. Then the sixth one seated there was bitten. “Ow!” “What, Gathered Blood? What is it?” asked Flying Scab. “I am being bitten!” he said. Next, the seventh one seated there was bitten. “Ow!” he said. “What, Pus Demon? What is it?” asked Gathered Blood. “I am being bitten!” he said. Then the eighth one seated there was bitten. “Ow!” he said. “What, Jaundice Demon? What is it?” asked Pus Demon. “I am being bitten!” he said. Then the ninth one seated there was bitten. “Ow!” he said. “What, Bone Staff? What is it?” asked Jaundice Demon. “I am being bitten!” he said. Then the tenth one seated there was bitten. “Ow!” “What, Skull Staff? What is it?” asked Bone Staff. “I am being bitten!” he said. Then the eleventh one seated there was bitten. “Ow!” he said next. “What, Wing? What is it?” asked Skull Staff. “I am being bitten!” he said. Next, the twelfth one seated there was bitten. “Ow!” he said. “What, Packstrap? What is it?” asked Wing. “I am being bitten!” Next was bitten the thirteenth one seated there. “Ow!” “What, Bloody Teeth? What is it?” asked Packstrap. “I am being bitten!” he said. Then the fourteenth seated one was bitten. “Ow!” “What, Bloody Claws? What is it?” asked Bloody Teeth. “I am being bitten!” he said. Thus their names were named. Each of them revealed the name of the other. Each of the individuals in order of their rank had his name revealed by the one who sat next to him.376 Not one of their names was missed until all of the names were named when they were bitten by a hair that Hunahpu had plucked from the front of his knee. It wasn’t really a mosquito that had bitten them. And so Hunahpu and Xbalanque heard the names of all of them. Thus they came to where the Xibalbans were. 376 There is a definite hierarchy among the lords of Xibalba, exemplified by the order in which they are seated on the palace bench. In traditional Maya confraternity houses, such as at Santiago Atitlán, there is a bench where, on ceremonial occasions, elders sit in the order of their rank of authority. “Hail these lords who are seated there,” said a tempter. “These are not lords. These are merely effigies carved of wood,” they said. Then they hailed each one of them:  “Morning, One Death.  Morning, Seven Death.377  Morning, Flying Scab.  Morning, Gathered Blood.  Morning, Pus Demon.  Morning, Jaundice Demon.  Morning, Bone Staff.  Morning, Skull Staff.  Morning, Wing.  Morning, Packstrap.  Morning, Bloody Teeth.  Morning, Bloody Claws,” they said when they  arrived there.  All of them had their faces revealed, for all of their names were named. Not one of their names was missed. When they were called upon, they gave the names of each one without leaving any of them out. “Sit down here,” they were told, for it was desired that they sit on top of the bench. But they didn’t want to: “This isn’t a bench for us. It is merely a heated stone,” said Hunahpu and Xbalanque. Thus they were not defeated. “Very well then, just go into that house,” they were told. So then they entered into the House of Darkness. But they were not defeated there either. In their hearts, the Xibalbans ordained that they would be defeated there in this, the first of the trials of Xibalba. 377 The greeting in each case is q'ala ta. Q'ala is a shortened version of “it is clear,” related to the common modern Quiché greeting in the morning, saqirik (it has dawned). Ta may simply mean “then,” a frequently used word in the text. It may also be a shortened form of tat (father), a term commonly used when addressing highly ranked or older persons. Thus they entered first into the House of Darkness. There the messenger of One Death gave to them a torch, already burning, and a cigar for each of them. And the messenger said when he arrived: “Thus says the lord: ‘Here is their torch. It must be given back at dawn along with the cigars. They must return them.’” “Very well,” they replied. But they didn’t light the torch. They just placed the red tail feather of a macaw on it as a substitute for flame. Thus the night watchmen saw it as if it were burning. As for the cigars, they just put fireflies on their tips. All night they would glow brilliantly because of them. “We have defeated them,” said the night watchmen. But the torch was not used up, for it was only an illusion. Neither did the cigars have anything burning on them. It was merely an illusion as well. Thus they returned them whole to the lords: “What becomes of them? Where did they come from? Who begat them? Who gave them birth? Truly our hearts are troubled, for it is not good what they are doing to us. Their appearance as well as their nature are unique,” they said one to another. Then they summoned all of the lords: “Let us play ball, boys,” they were told. But first they were questioned by One Death and Seven Death: “Where did you really come from? Would you tell us, boys?” they were asked by the Xibalbans. “We must have come from somewhere, but we don’t know.” Only this they said. They told them nothing. “Very well then. We will just go and play ball,378 boys,” the Xibalbans said to them. “Fine,” they replied. “Here is our rubber ball that we will use,” said the Xibalbans. “No, we will use ours,” said the boys. “Not so. We will use this one that is ours,” said again the Xibalbans. “Very well,” said the boys. “It appears to be a skull, but it is merely drawn on the ball,”379 said the Xibalbans. “It is not. It is a skull we tell you,” said the boys. “Not so,” replied the Xibalbans. “Very well then,” said Hunahpu. 378 The ballgame was played throughout Mesoamerica beginning at least by the time of the Olmecs ca. 1500 B.C. Although the rules varied over time and from region to region, it generally involved opposing teams of two or more players attempting to bounce a solid rubber ball without the use of hands through a ring placed vertically along the ballcourt’s walls. Sahagun described a similar type of ballgame among the Aztecs in the sixteenth century: These balls... were solid, of a certain resin or gum which is called ulli [rubber] which is very light in weight and bounces like an inflated ball.... The ballgame was called tlaxtli or tlachtli. The court consisted of two walls with some twenty or thirty feet of distance between them and each was up to forty or fifty feet in length. The floor and walls were heavily plastered, the latter having some one and a half estados [nearly ten feet] in height. In the middle of the court was a line made especially for the game; and in the middle of the walls, halfway down the playing stretch, were two stones like millstones perforated in the middle, facing each other, and they each had holes wide enough that the ball could fit into each of them. And whoever placed the ball there won the game. They did not play with their hands but hit the ball with their flanks. For playing they wore gloves on their hands and a leather apron on their flanks to hit the ball (Sahagún 1938, II.viii.10, pp. 297-298). 379 The verb root, juch' means “to draw lines or to adorn with figures” according to Coto. Thus the Xibalbans try to convince the twins that their ball looks like a skull only because it has had skull-like features drawn on it. Thus the Xibalbans threw down their rubber ball, which landed before the yoke of Hunahpu. And when the Xibalbans saw this, the White Dagger came out of their rubber ball. It clashed about over the ground of the entire ballcourt, threatening the boys. “What is that?” asked Hunahpu and Xbalanque. “You just want death for us. Did we not answer your summons when your messenger came? Have pity on us. We will just go, then,” said the boys to them. It was their desire that the boys would straightaway die there because of the blade. They were to have been defeated. But it was not so. It was the Xibalbans who were now defeated by the boys. “Don’t go, boys. We will just play with your ball,” the boys were told. “Very well then,” they replied. Thus they took out their rubber ball, and it was thrown down. Then their prizes were chosen: “What will we win?” the Xibalbans asked. “Surely it is your choice,” the boys said. “Our prize380 shall be merely four bowls of flowers,” said the Xibalbans. “Very well. What kinds of flowers?” the boys asked the Xibalbans. “One bowl of red petals,381 one bowl of white petals, one bowl of yellow petals, and one bowl of the large ones,” said the Xibalbans. “Very well,” replied the boys. 380 This is likely a play on words between ch'ako'n (prize, spoils) and related words such as ch'akom (cuttings of flowers or plants), and chakaj (bouquet, bunch of flowers according to Varea). 381 This reading for much'ij is based on much' (to break apart, crumble, break into pieces). Flower petals are commonly given as offerings in modern highland Maya ceremonies, often broken off the flower as part of the ceremony as prayers are made. It would be much easier for the ants to carry away petals than whole flowers. Alternatively, it may be related to muchechen, which Basseta defines as “a fragrant flower,” and a “sign of love.” So then the ball was dropped into play. They were equal in strength, but the boys made many plays with the ball for they played with all their hearts. At last, the boys gave themselves up to be defeated, and the Xibalbans thus rejoiced at their defeat: “We have done well. We have already defeated them at the first attempt,” said the Xibalbans. “Where shall they go to get the flowers?” they asked in their hearts. “You will give to us the flowers as our prize early in the morning,” the boys Hunahpu and Xbalanque were told by the Xibalbans. “Very well. We will play ball again early in the morning,” they said. Then they made their plans together. Thus the boys entered into Blade House, the second trial of Xibalba. Here it was desired that they would be sliced apart by the blades. They were to have died quickly in their hearts. But they did not die. They spoke to the blades, instructing them in this way: “Yours shall be the flesh of animals,” they said to the blades. Thus they stopped moving. As one they all lowered the points of their blades. And while they were passing the night in Blade House, they called out to all the ants: “Cutting ants,382 conquering ants, come! Go and get flower blossoms as prizes for the lords.” “Very well,” they said. Then the ants went to get flowers from the garden of One Death and Seven Death. Now the Xibalbans had previously instructed the guardians of their flowers: 382 These are large, leaf-cutting ants, known in Guatemala as zompopos. “Look after our flowers with all vigilance. Do not allow them to be stolen. For by these we have defeated the boys. What if they were able to obtain these as our prize? Thus do not sleep all night.” “Very well,” they said then. But the guardians of the garden did not notice anything. They would just cry out aimlessly in the branches of the trees. They just toddled along through the garden repeating their song: “Shpurpuwek, shpurpuwek,”383 said the one when he called. “Puhuyu, puhuyu,” said the other, the whippoorwill by name, when he called. These two were the guardians of the garden of One Death and Seven Death. They didn’t notice the ants stealing that which they were guarding. They swarmed384 and thronged, carrying away the flowers. They went to cut down flowers from the tops of trees, gathering them together with those from below the trees. All this they did while the guardians were crying out, not noticing that their tails and wings were being gnawed on as well. The flowers were thus loosened until they fell down to be gathered up. The four bowls were thus quickly filled with their flowers. By dawn they had all been collected. Then the messengers arrived to summon them: “‘Come!’ says the lord. ‘May they straightaway bring hither our prize,’” the boys were told. 383 Tedlock interprets this as the call of the whippoorwill (D. Tedlock 1996, 274 n. 123). Interestingly enough, the Quiché version of the call is phonetically very similar to the English name for the bird as well as to its song. 384 B'olowik is literally “to boil.” It is also used to describe the swarming of insects according to Coto. “Very well,” they answered. For they had collected the flowers into the four bowls. Thus they went, arriving before the lords. Now the lords received the flowers with woeful faces. Thus the Xibalbans were defeated. The boys had just sent ants, and in one night they had collected the flowers in the bowls. Thus the Xibalbans all turned pale. Their faces were pallid because of the flowers. And so they summoned the flower guardians: “For what reason have you allowed our flowers to be stolen? These flowers that you see are ours,” the guardians were told. “We noticed nothing, O lords. But our tails have surely suffered385 for it,” they replied. Then their mouths were split open386 as punishment for allowing that which they were guarding to be stolen. Thus One Death and Seven Death were defeated by Hunahpu and Xbalanque. And this is the reason why the mouths of whippoorwills gape wide open to this day. Then the ball was dropped into play again, but the game was even. And when they had finished playing ball, they planned together once more: “At dawn again,” said the Xibalbans. “Very well,” said the boys when they had finished. 385 Kuyu is “to suffer, or endure.” It is also used to describe something “bent, crooked, crippled, or lame.” Either reading would be applicable here. Whippoorwills have very short wing and tail feathers. 386 This is apparently meant as a play on words. The whippoorwills are said to have “cried out,” in song when they should have been guarding the gardens of Xibalba. The Quiché phrase is “they broke open their mouths.” Now the Xibalba lords “split open their mouths” as the punishment chosen to match the birds’ crime. HUNAHPU AND XBALANQUE IN THE HOUSE OF COLD387 AND so they now entered the House of Cold. The cold here was immeasurable. The interior of the House of Cold was thick with hail. But straightaway the boys caused the cold to dissipate.388 They did it in. They ruined and destroyed the cold. Thus they did not die, but rather were alive when it dawned again. The Xibalbans had wanted them to die there, but this was not to be. Instead they were just fine when the dawn came. So then their guardians came again to summon them. “What is this? Haven’t they died?” asked the lords of Xibalba. And again they marveled at the deeds of the boys, Hunahpu and Xbalanque. HUNAHPU AND XBALANQUE IN THE HOUSE OF JAGUARS389 NEXT they entered into Jaguar House, which was crowded inside with jaguars: “Do not eat us. We will give you what is yours,” the jaguars were told. Then they scattered bones before the beasts, who voraciously crunched them.390 The hearts of the night watchmen found this sweet, saying, “They are finished. They have given themselves up. They have eaten their hearts, and now these are their skeletons that are being gnawed upon.” 387 lines 3994-4017 388 Tzaj is to “evaporate, dry up, dissipate, exhaust.” 389 lines 4018-4037 390 Paq'aq'ik refers to the sound of crunching, gnawing, or eating rapidly. It is also used to describe the sound of walking over dry leaves. Alternatively it may also refer to the sound of something being rent or split. But they didn’t die. They were just fine when they came out again from Jaguar House. “What kind of people are these? Where have they come from?” asked all the Xibalbans. HUNAHPU AND XBALANQUE IN THE HOUSE OF FIRE391 NEXT they went into the fire, for there was a House of Fire. There was nothing but fire inside. But they were not burned. They were to have been roasted and set aflame. Instead they were just fine when dawn came. It had been desired that they would straightaway die when they passed through there, but it was not so. Thus all the Xibalbans lost heart as a result. HUNAHPU AND XBALANQUE IN THE HOUSE OF BATS392 NEXT they were put inside Bat House, which had only bats inside. It was a house of death bats. These were great beasts with snouts like blades that they used as murderous weapons. When they arrived there, they were to be finished off. They had to crawl inside their blowguns to sleep so that they would not be eaten there in this house. Nevertheless, it was because of a single death bat that they gave themselves up in defeat. It came swooping down. But this was merely a way to manifest themselves when it occured. 391 lines 4038-4051 392 lines 4052-4177 Thus they pleaded for wisdom all that night as the bats made a din with their flapping wings. “Keeleetz! Keeleetz!” they said all night long. At length things quieted a little, and the bats became motionless. Thus one of the boys crawled to the end of his blowgun. Xbalanque said, “Hunahpu, do you see the dawn yet?” “I will go and see for certain if has happened,” he replied. Hunahpu truly wanted to look out of the mouth of his blowgun to see the dawn. But when he did so, his head was cut off by the death bat,393 leaving the greater part of his body behind. “What? Hasn’t it dawned yet?” asked Xbalanque. But Hunahpu did not move. “What is going on? Hunahpu wouldn’t have left. What then has he done?” But nothing moved; only the rustling of wings was heard. Thus Xbalanque was ashamed: “Alas,394 we have given in already,” he said. At the word of One Death and Seven Death, the head was placed atop the ballcourt. Thus all the Xibalbans rejoiced because of the head of Hunahpu. Then Xbalanque summoned all of the animals—the coati and the peccary, and all the animals both small and great—while it was still dark, early in the morning. He then entreated them for their food: 393 The ability of bats to cut down fruit from trees while in flight associated them in the mind of the ancient Maya with decapitation sacrifice. Bats are often seen painted on ancient Maya vessels as underworld denizens of death, decorated with crossed bones and extruded eyeballs that have their optic nerves still dangling from them. 394 Ximénez translates akarok as “Ay! Ay!” In English the more common expression of lament would be “Alas!” “I send each of you to bring the food that belongs to you,” said Xbalanque to them. “Very well,” they said. Then they all went to obtain what was theirs. When they returned they were many. One brought back rotten things, another brought leaves, another brought stones, and yet another brought dirt. Thus the animals, both small and great, each brought their various foods. Now after many had come, the coati arrived last of all bringing a chilacayote squash. She395 came rolling it along with her nose. This was to be transformed into the head of Hunahpu. Immediately its eyes were carved upon it. Numerous sages came down from the sky. For Heart of Sky, he who is Huracan, appeared here. He arrived here in Bat House. But the face wasn’t completed successfully in time. Only its beautiful covering had appeared. It only had the ability to speak by the time the horizon of the sky began to redden, for it was about to dawn. “Blacken it again with soot, old man,”396 the possum397 was told. 395 The coati is consistently associated with females in the text, just as the peccary is associated with males. They are particularly identified as the grandmother and grandfather deities respectively (pp. 60-61, 80, 98; lines 22-23, 559-560, 1055-1056). Akkeren cites a possible ethnographic survival of this association between the coati and gourds. In the Yucatec village of Xcacal, a ceiba tree is cut down in the forest and re.erected as a “tree of abundance” in the center of the main plaza. An actor dressed as a coati climbs the tree and scatters squash seeds while tying fruit to its branches (Akkeren 2000, 296). 396 Ama' is a general term for “male,” whether human or animal. In this case, it is used as a nickname for the aged possum deity. Because of the possum’s gray coat, awkward gait, and snaggly teeth, the Maya associated this animal with old age (Miller and Taube 1993, 128). 397 Father Coto lists under the Spanish word Escuridad, that vuch (possum) is the darkness of night just prior to the dawn (Coto 1983, 207-8). This is perhaps a manifestation of the creator deity Xpiyacoc, one of whose principal titles is Hunahpu Possum (Karen Bassie-Sweet, personal communication; see pp. 60, 79.80; lines 20, 500, 555). In the Tzotzil area, a grandfather possum, called “Old Man Possum,” is associated “Fine,” replied the Grandfather. And he blackened the sky with soot until it was dark again. Four times the Grandfather blackened it with soot. Thus today people say, “The possum blackens it with soot.” Finally the sky succeeded in turning red, and then blue when it began its existence. “Is it not good?” Hunahpu was asked. “Yes, it is good,” he replied. For his head was well supported. It became just like a true head. Then they planned a deception;398 they took counsel together: “Don’t play ball. Just look threatening. I will surely be the one to accomplish it,” said Xbalanque to him. Then he instructed a rabbit: “Be there at the head of the ballcourt in the tomato patch,”399 the rabbit was told by Xbalanque. “And when the rubber ball comes your way, hop away until I accomplish my task,” the rabbit was told. Thus he was given his instructions there in the night. with the dawn at the beginning of the planting season, and that the red light of the east is said to be one of his manifestations: “'Uch [Possum] is greatly respected, because it has fire, because at dawn it lights up the hills. It is not the sunlight, for the sun rises later.... 'Uch is as God because it has light, a red light, that later disappears to give place to the God, the sun. Neither ‘Okinahual nor 'Uch are evil, but they must be respected as a God. God must be respected, but he is not bad. Perhaps he punishes when he is overlooked” (Guiteras-Holmes 1961, 195-197; cf. 33, 206, 292). Akkeren compares this passage with the New Years pages of the Dresden Codex in which a possum deity presides over the five days of the Wayeb at the close of the annual cycle. In the Popol Vuh account, however, the possum is associated not with the annual change of the solar year, but “the moment of the new Sun-era” (Akkeren 2000, 290). 398 Xkib'an ki tzij (they made their words). To “make” words is to deceive or to lie. 399 There is some confusion as to where the rabbit was told to be. The manuscript here reads pixc, which Tedlock reads as pixik' (acorn or oak). This is contradicted, however, by lines 4197 and 4217, which read pix (tomatoes, or tomato patch), a reading given by most translators. The confusion may be due to a play on And when it dawned, the both of them were well.400 THE HEAD OF HUNAHPU IS RESTORED401 SO the ball was again dropped into play. The head of Hunahpu was first placed atop the ballcourt. “We have already triumphed. You are finished. You gave in, so give it up,” they were told. But Hunahpu just called out: “Strike402 the head as if it were a rubber ball,” they were told. “No harm will come to us now, for we are holding our own.” Thus the lords of Xibalba threw down403 the ball where it was met by Xbalanque. The ball landed before his yoke and bounced away. It sailed clear over the ballcourt. It just bounced once, then twice, landing in the tomatoes. Then the rabbit came out, hopping along.404 All the Xibalbans thus went after him. The Xibalbans all went after the rabbit, shouting and rushing about. words, a practice beloved by the Maya. Pixk'onik is the verb for “to hop (like a rabbit or flea),” while the rabbit is pixab'ax (instructed) in lines 4164 and 4174. 400 Literally “good their faces both of them,” the standard way of saying that they were “fine,” but also in this context a clever play on words considering the newly-made “face” of Hunahpu. 401 lines 4178-4241 402 The action referred to is, unfortunately, not clear. According to Coto, k'aqa may be “to strike, to throw,” or even generally “to play ball.” 403 This is a case where the limitations of the Latin alphabet in which the manuscript was written are apparent. The text reads xetzacou. If this is to be read as xetzaqow, it would mean that the Xibalbans “threw out” the ball into play. Alternatively, if it is to be read as xetzak'ow, it would mean that the Xibalbans “struck” the ball. It is impossible to know which of these alternatives is correct, although it would be helpful to our understanding of how the game was played. 404 The hopping of the rabbit thus confuses the lords of Xibalba into thinking it is the bouncing ball. Thus the twins were able to retrieve the head of Hunahpu, replacing it where the chilacayote squash had been. They then placed the chilacayote squash on the ballcourt, while the true head of Hunahpu was his once more. Therefore they both rejoiced again. While the Xibalbans were out searching for their rubber ball, the twins retrieved it from the tomato patch. And when they had done so, they called out: “Come on! We found our rubber ball!” they said. Thus they were carrying the round ball405 when the Xibalbans returned. “What was it that we saw?” they asked. And so they began again to play ball, both teams making equal plays until at last Xbalanque struck the chilacayote squash, strewing it all over the ballcourt. Thus its seeds were scattered before them.406 “What is this that has been brought here? Where is he that brought it?” asked the Xibalbans. Thus the lords of Xibalba were defeated by Hunahpu and Xbalanque. They had passed through great affliction, but despite everything that had been done to them, they did not die. THE DEATHS OF HUNAHPU AND XBALANQUE407 THIS, then, is the memorial to the deaths of Hunahpu and Xbalanque. We shall now tell it in memory of their death. 405 Ki k'olem (they were carrying a round thing). This is undoubtedly a reference to the ball, although it is not specified (James Mondloch, personal communication). 406 A play on words is made here between saqiram (scattered) and saqilal (squash seeds). If one did not recognize the pun in the original Quiché, the choice of words would be confusing. 407 lines 4242-4365 What they had planned to do, they had done despite all their afflictions and misfortunes. Thus they did not die in the trials of Xibalba. Neither were they defeated by all the ravenous beasts that lived there. And then they summoned two seers. Visionary persons they were. The names of these sages were Descended408 and Ascended: “The lords of Xibalba may inquire of you concerning our death. They are even now putting together their thoughts on the matter, because we have not yet died. We have not been defeated. We confounded their trials. Nor have the animals seized us. This, therefore, is the sign that is in our hearts. Heated stones will be the means by which our murder will be accomplished. Thus when all Xibalba has gathered together to determine how to ensure our death, this shall be the idea that you will propose. If you are asked about our death when we are burned, this is what you shall tell them, you, Descended and you, Ascended, if they should speak to you about it: “‘Wouldn’t it perhaps be good if we scatter their bones in the canyon?’ “Then you are to say, ‘This would not be good, for they would merely arise again to new life.’409 “Then they will say to you, ‘Perhaps it would be good to merely hang them in the top of a tree?’ 408 The Colonial period Varea dictionary lists Xulu (Descended) as “[spirit] familiars appearing alongside rivers.” Basseta lists ah xulu as “a diviner,” consistent with the statement in the Popol Vuh that he is a visionary seer. The paired figures “Descended” and “Ascended” likely refer to the common modern expression “to go down and up,” which means to “go all over, or everywhere” (Jim Mondloch, personal communication). 409 Literally “would be revived their faces.” “You will then reply, ‘Certainly that would not be good, for you would see their faces before you.’ “Then the third time they will say, ‘Would it be a good thing if we merely scatter their bones in the course of the river?’ “If then you are asked this, you will reply, ‘It is good that they should die. And it would be good if their bones were ground upon the face of a stone like finely ground maize flour. Each one of them should be ground separately. Then these should be scattered there in the course of the river. They should be sprinkled on the river that winds among the small and great mountains.’ “This, then, is what you will say. Thus will be made manifest what we have said to you in counsel,” said Hunahpu410 and Xbalanque. For when they had thus counseled them, they already knew of their death. The Xibalbans were even then putting together the great heated stones in the form of a pit oven,411 placing large hot coals within it. Then came the messengers of One Death and Seven Death to accompany them: “The lords say to us: ‘May they come! Bring them so that they may see what we have cooked up for them.’412 This is the word of the lords unto you, boys,” they were told. “Very well,” they replied. 410 The manuscript reads Xhunahpu (Little Hunahpu) which is the diminutive form of Hunahpu. It is perhaps used in this section to distinguish him from his father One Hunahpu, who had also died in Xibalba. 411 Chojib'al (pit oven) is dug into the ground and filled with hot stones or coals to roast meat. 412 This is a play on words. Chojij means “to cook, broil, or set fire to something”; but it also means “to straighten out, take a direct route, or rectify something.” Thus the Xibalbans were trying to trick the twins by saying that they were going to settle things, while at the same time hinting at the means by which they intended to kill them. Thus they went quickly to the mouth of the pit oven. There the Xibalbans wanted to force them into playing with them: “Let us jump over this our sweet drink. Four times each of us will go across it, boys,” they were told by One Death.413 “You cannot trick us with this. Do we not already know the means of our death, O lords? You shall surely see it,” they said. Then they turned to face one another, spread out their arms and together they went into the pit oven. Thus both of them died there. Then all the Xibalbans rejoiced at this. They contentedly shouted and whistled: “We have defeated them. None too soon have they given themselves up,” they said. Then they summoned Descended and Ascended, with whom word had been left by the boys. And the Xibalbans divined of them what was to be done with their bones. Thus according to their word, the bones were ground up and strewn along the course of the river. But they did not go far away; they just straightaway sank there beneath the water. And when they appeared again, it was as chosen boys, for thus they had become. 413 The Xibalbans are lying about the purpose of the pit. They are suggesting that it is an underground vat for making some intoxicating drink, whereas in reality it is a pit oven into which they hope to trick the twins into falling. THE RESURRECTION OF HUNAHPU AND XBALANQUE414 ON the fifth day they appeared again. People saw them in the river, for the two of them appeared like people-fish. Now when their faces were seen by the Xibalbans, they made a search for them in the rivers. And on the very next day, they appeared again as two poor orphans.415 They wore rags in front and rags on their backs. Rags were thus all they had to cover themselves. But they did not act according to their appearance when they were seen by the Xibalbans. For they did the Dance of the Whippoorwill and the Dance of the Weasel. They danced the Armadillo and the Centipede.416 They danced the Injury, for many marvels they did then. They set fire to a house as if it were truly burning, then immediately recreated it again as the Xibalbans watched with admiration. Then again they sacrificed themselves. One of them would die, surely throwing himself down in death. Then having been killed, he would immediately be revived. And the Xibalbans simply watched them while they did it. Now all of this was merely the groundwork for the defeat of the Xibalbans at their hands. 414 lines 4366-4398 415 Meb'a' literally means “poor,” but it may also apply to one who has met with misfortune, such as an orphan, widow, or beggar. The twins reappear as youths that have no parents (p. 182; lines 4459-4468), suggesting that “orphan” may be an appropriate translation. On the other hand, they are obviously poor (p. 182; line 4428-4430), dressed in rags (p. 180; lines 4373-4375), and in need of resources (p. 182; lines 4489-4490). I have chosen “poor orphans” because it includes both meanings. 416 Xtz'ul is a centipede. The Varea dictionary lists xts'ul as “a dance with small masks and macaw tail feathers.” During this dance, participants put sticks down their throats (like sword swallowers), bones in their noses, and give themselves hard blows on their chests with a large stone. Basseta also defines this as a dance, in which masked performers with tortoiseshell rattles put sticks or daggers in their mouths (like sword-swallowers). A variant name for centipede is Q'uq'kumatz (Feathered Serpent), indicating that this may be a dance in honor of that creator deity (Coto 1983, 128). THE SUMMONS OF HUNAHPU AND XBALANQUE BEFORE THE LORDS417 AT length the news of their dances came to the ears of the lords One Death and Seven Death. And when they had heard of it, they said: “Who are these two poor orphans? Is it truly delightful? Is it true that their dancing and all that they do is beautiful?” For the lords were delighted with the account when they heard it. Thus they entreated their messengers to summon them to come: “Say this to them: ‘May they come so that we may watch them, for we marvel at them,’ say the lords.” Thus the messengers went to the dancers and repeated the words of the lords to them. “We don’t want to, for in truth we are timid. We would be ashamed to enter into such a lordly house! Our faces are truly ugly,418 and our eyes are just wide in poverty. Don’t they see that we are merely dancers? What then would we say to our fellow orphans? We have responsibilities. They also desire our dances, for they revive their faces with us. It is not right that we should do the same with the lords. Therefore we do not want to do this, O messengers,” said Hunahpu and Xbalanque. But they were pestered, threatened with misfortune and pain. And so they went with apprehension,419 for they didn’t want to be going any too soon. Many times they had 417 lines 4399-4447 418 Literally “evil/bad/filthy our faces,” a common expression for “ugly” among modern Quichés as well. 419 Literally “red misfortune they went.” to be prodded because they just walked along slowly, making little progress, while the messengers who brought them led the way to the lords. HUNAHPU AND XBALANQUE DANCE BEFORE THE LORDS OF XIBALBA420 AT length they arrived before the lords. They pretended to be humble,421 prostrating themselves422 when they came. They humbled themselves, stooping over and bowing. They hid themselves with rags, giving the appearance that they were truly just poor orphans when they arrived. Then they were asked where their home mountain was423 and who their people were. They were also asked about their mother and their father: “Where do you come from?” they were asked. “We do not know, O lord. Neither do we know the faces of our mother or our father. We were still small when they died,” they just said. They didn’t tell them anything. “Very well then. On with the spectacle. What do you want us to give you as payment?” they were asked. “We don’t want anything. Truly we are frightened,” they said again to the lord. “Do not be afraid or timid. Dance! First you will do that dance in which you sacrifice yourselves. Then burn down my home. Do everything that you know. We would 420 lines 4448-4573 421 Moch'och'ik is “to humble one’s self hypocritically” (Basseta). 422 “To throw one’s face on the ground” (Basseta). 423 The Quichés still give directions by indicating which mountain is located nearby the destination. It is not uncommon to ask the location of a town or a person’s house and be told, “go two mountains to the west and one to the north.” watch this, for it was the desire of our hearts that you be summoned. Because you are poor orphans, we will pay whatever you ask as your price,” they were told. Thus they began their songs and their dances, and all the Xibalbans came until the place was overflowing with spectators.424 They danced everything. They danced the Weasel. They danced the Whippoorwill. They danced the Armadillo. Then the lord spoke to them: “Sacrifice my dog, then revive him again,” they were told. “All right,” they replied. So they sacrificed his dog and then revived him once more. The dog was truly happy when they revived him. He vigorously wagged his tail when they brought him back to life. Then the lord spoke again to them: “Now you must surely burn my home,” they were told. So then they burned the home of the lord. The house was overflowing with all the lords, yet none were burned. Immediately it was restored again. Thus the home of One Death was not lost after all. All the lords marveled, therefore, and greatly rejoiced at their dances. The lord thus spoke again to them: 424 The Título Pedro Velasco records that prior to the Spanish conquest, the highland Maya of Guatemala conducted dances in special “guest houses” in which their rulers danced in honor of their gods: “Each of the lineages had a house to hear the word and to administer judgment. There the lords danced the Junajpu C'oy and the Wukub Cak'ix, the Awata Tun, and the Jolom Tun. Each lineage had divisions, each with a house” (Carmack and Mondloch 1989, 178). Fray Gerónimo de Mendieta wrote that “one of the principal things which existed in this land were the songs and dances, to solemnize the festivals of their demons which they honored as gods, as well as to rejoice and find solace. The house of each principal lord thus had a chapel for singers and a place for dances. The great dances were held in the plazas or in the house patios of the great lords, for all had large plazas” (Mendieta 1993, 140). These special houses are likely analogous to confraternity houses today, where traditionalist Maya continue to conduct dances in honor of deity. “Now kill a person. Sacrifice him, but not so that he really dies,” they were told. “Very well,” they said. So they grabbed a person and sacrificed him. They extracted the heart of one of them and placed it before the lords. Now One Death and Seven Death marveled at this, for immediately that person was revived again by them. When he had been revived, his heart greatly rejoiced. And again the lords marveled at it: “Now sacrifice yourselves. We would see this. Truly it is the desire of our hearts that you dance,” said again the lords. “Very well then, O lord,” they replied. So then they sacrificed themselves. Hunahpu was sacrificed by Xbalanque. Each of his legs and arms was severed. His head was cut off and placed far away. His heart was dug out and placed on a leaf.425 Now all these lords of Xibalba were drunk at the sight, as Xbalanque went on dancing. “Arise!” he said, and immediately he was brought back to life again. Now the lords rejoiced greatly. One Death and Seven Death rejoiced as if they were the ones doing it. They were so involved that it was as if they themselves were dancing. THE DEFEAT OF THE LORDS OF XIBALBA426 FOR it was the desire of the lords to abandon their hearts to the dances of Hunahpu and Xbalanque. Then came the words of One Death and Seven Death: “Do it to us! Sacrifice us!” they said. 425 Tz'alik is a leaf used for wrapping maize tamales. The implication is that the heart was placed on a leaf prior to wrapping it as an offering. An alternative reading would have this word derived from tz'alam a flat stone or altar. 426 lines 4574-4639 “Sacrifice us in the same way,”427 said One Death and Seven Death to Hunahpu and Xbalanque. “Very well then. Surely you will be revived. Are you not death? For we are here to gladden you, O lords, along with your vassals and your servants,”428 they said therefore to the lords. The first to be sacrificed was the very head of all the lords, One Death by name, the lord of Xibalba. He was dead then, this One Death. Next they grabbed Seven Death. But they didn’t revive them. Thus the Xibalbans took to their heels when they saw that the lords had died. Their hearts were now taken from their chests. Both of them had been torn open as punishment for what they had done. Straightaway the one lord was executed and not revived. The other lord had then begged humbly, weeping before the dancers. He would not accept it, for he had become disoriented: “Take pity on me,” he said in his regret. Then all of their vassals and servants fled into the great canyon. They packed themselves into the great ravine until they were piled up one on top of the other. Then innumerable ants swarmed into the canyon, as if they had been driven there. And when the ants came, the Xibalbans all bowed themselves down, giving themselves up. They approached begging humbly and weeping. For the lords of Xibalba were defeated. It was just a miracle, for the boys had transformed themselves before them. 427 The manuscript reads junal taj (“the same way” or possibly “one by one”). The particular form of this word is somewhat odd. It seems to be a play on words with junalik/junelik (forever), thus hinting that the sacrifice would not be so much “the same” as was done before, but would be permanent. A further pun is seen in the phrase at the beginning of this section, “it was the desire of the lords to abandon their hearts,” thus foreshadowing the means of their death. 428 Literally your “child of mother” and your “sons of men.” In this case, these are metaphors that are used frequently in the text for vassals and servants. And then they declared their names. They revealed their names before all Xibalba. THE MIRACULOUS MAIZE OF HUNAHPU AND XBALANQUE429 “HEAR our names!430 We shall now declare them. We shall also declare the names of our fathers to you. We are they whose names are Hunahpu and Xbalanque. Our fathers are they who you killed, One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu by name. We are the avengers of the misfortune and affliction of our fathers. For this reason, we have endured all the tribulations that you have caused us. Thus we shall now destroy you all. We will kill you, for none among you shall now be saved,” they were told. Then all Xibalba begged humbly, weeping. “Take pity on us, you, Hunahpu and Xbalanque. Truly we have wronged your fathers that you have named—they who are buried at Crushing Ballcourt,” they said. “Very well. Here then is our word that we declare to you. Hearken all you of Xibalba; for never again will you or your posterity be great. Your offerings also will never again be great. They will henceforth be reduced to croton sap.431 No longer will clean blood be yours.432 Unto you will be given only worn-out griddles and pots,433 only flimsy434 and brittle things. 429 lines 4640-4772 430 It was traditional in Mesoamerican societies to declare one’s name when a victory has been won in battle or when superiority has been established. 431 This fulfills the prophecy of Lady Blood, in which she declared that the lords of Xibalba would no longer be allowed to receive human hearts in sacrifice but rather would have to accept the red sap of the croton tree (pp. 132-133; lines 2444-2445). 432 The ancient Maya offered their own blood to the gods to give them a portion of their life force. This would be fresh, clean blood. Tedlock’s collaborator, Andrés Xiloj, commented that the Xibalbans are “You shall surely eat only the creatures of the grass and the creatures of the wastelands. No longer will you be given the children of the light, those begotten in the light. Only things of no importance435 will fall before you. “Only the sinner and the malevolent, the wretch and the molester who clearly have sinned, will be given to you. No longer will you be able to seize suddenly just any person.436 You will be called upon only over the sap of the croton,” they were told, all they of Xibalba. Thus began their devastation, the ruin of their being called upon in worship. Their glory was not great in the past, for they wanted only conflict with the people of ancient times. Surely they were not true gods. Their names merely inspired fear, for their faces were evil.437 They were strife makers, traitors,438 and tempters to sin and violence.439 They were also masters of deception,440 of the black view and the white view. They were allowed to collect only blood that has been spilled on the ground (through injury, illness, or violence), thus making it dirty (D. Tedlock 1996, 283 n. 138). 433 At the end of each ritual year, broken bits of pottery are left at shrines to symbolize the passing of one age to another. New pots and utensils represent a new beginning and an opportunity for a fresh start in life. 434 The adjective ch'uch' describes something that is soft and flimsy and thus unable to hold its shape. 435 According to Basseta, these are “things of no importance,” or “abandoned things.” 436 The Quichés believe that the lords of Xibalba have power only over those who have truly committed punishable offenses and have thus submitted themselves to the powers of the underworld. 437 Itzel ki wach may mean “evil their faces,” or “ugly their faces.” 438 Aj tukur. Basseta records that ah tucur (literally “owl master”) is “traitor.” The name may also refer to the inhabitants of the Alta Verapaz region, which was called the “land of the owls” or Tecolotlán (Recinos 1950, 114 n. 6). 439 Lab'al is “war, violence, offense.” In modern Quiché society it refers to a savage or violent person. 440 Literally “masters of the buried heart.” called masters of harm441 and vexation. Fundamentally their faces were hidden. Thus their greatness and glory were destroyed. Never again would their dominion become great. This was the accomplishment of Hunahpu and Xbalanque.442 Now at the same time, the Grandmother was weeping, crying out443 before the ears of unripe maize that had been left planted. They had sprouted, but then they dried up when they were burned in the pit oven. Then the ears of maize had sprouted once again, and the Grandmother had burned copal incense444 before them as a memorial. The heart of their grandmother rejoiced when the maize sprouted a second time.445 441 Mox wach is “left face” or “crazy face.” In modern usage it may refer to insanity, however Coto and Basseta both relate this to “violence, harm, or mischief.” 442 Las Casas recorded a similar myth that he collected in the Verapaz region of Guatemala: “Among other tales, they say that he [Exbalanquén], went to hell to make war, fought with all the people there, defeated them, and captured the king and many of his army. Upon his return to earth, Exbalanquén brought the king of hell with him, but when they were only three or four steps from the light, he begged not to be taken away; and so the victorious Exbalanquén, with much anger, gave him a kick and said to him, ‘Go back and may yours be all that is rotten, discarded, and stinks’” (Las Casas 1967, III, cxxiv, p. 650. Translation by author). 443 The verb roots in this couplet, oq' (to weep) and sik'ij (to call), when used together in this order imply fervent prayer, such as is done by priests at native altars (D. Tedlock 1996, 284 n. 139). As a goddess of fertility and the seasons, the weeping of Xmucane may have been associated by the Quichés with life-giving rains that helped the dry maizestalks to sprout again. 444 Pom (copal incense) is made from the resin of the palo jiote tree (Bursera verrucosa). Copal is still burned by the Quichés as an offering to both Christian and traditional Maya deities. 445 This incident is perhaps paralleled by contemporary agricultural practices among the highland Maya. The following is a description of a traditional planting ceremony as told by Nicolás Chávez Sojuel, a Tz'utujil Maya from Santiago Atitlán: After preparing the ground, but before planting, four candles are placed at the corners of the maize field representing the four directions of the earth—in the east so that light will shine on the seeds; in the west so that the maize won’t be burned by the sun; in the north so that the maize seed will be protected; and in the south so that the harvest will be abundant.... At the center he then places a special kind of maize ear called yo'x (twins) which splits at the end to form extra little cobs. These have been previously blessed by a shaman in the Confraternity of San Juan where the ruk'ux' way (heart of food) is kept in a wooden chest. many yo'x cobs hang from the ceiling there because that is where maize is born. These cobs are burned and their ashes are buried beneath the ground so that they can come back to life and make more maize (Christenson 2001, 117). Thus they were deified by their grandmother. She named it Center House, Center Ancestral Plot,446 Revitalized Maize, and Leveled Earth. She named it Center House and Center Harvest for it was in the very center of the interior of their home where they had planted the ears of maize. She named it Leveled Earth and Revitalized Maize for it was upon level ground that the ears of maize had been planted. She named it Revitalized Maize because the maize had sprouted again. These names were given by Xmucane to what Hunahpu and Xbalanque had left planted. This was a memorial to them by their grandmother. Now their fathers, One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu, had died long ago. They now went, therefore, to see the face of their father there at Xibalba. Their father spoke to them when Xibalba was defeated. THE APOTHEOSIS OF THE SUN, MOON, AND STARS447 HERE now is the adornment of their father by them, along with the adornment of Seven Hunahpu. For they went to adorn them at Crushing Ballcourt. They merely wanted his face to be restored. Thus they asked him to name everything—his mouth, his nose, and his eyes. He was able to recover the first name, but The hole in the center of the maizefield into which the ashes of the yo'x maize cobs are buried is called the rumuxux (navel), the same name applied to a small hole in the nave of the town’s church which the Tz'utujil believe to be an access point to the underworld realm of the dead. The Atiteco practice of first burning and then burying split cobs of maize, which they call “twins,” recalls the history of the twins in the Popol Vuh who also descended into the underworld where they were burned to ashes and eventually rose to new life, parallel with the maize plants in the grandmother’s household. 446 This reading is based on the work of Adrián Chávez, a prominent Quiché scholar who understood b'ichok as a solar, the Spanish word for an ancestral dwelling, or the plot of land once owned by ancestors (Chávez 1997, 63).447 lines 4773-4821 then little more was said. He did not say the corresponding names for that which is above the mouth.448 Still, this had been said, and thus they honored him. Thus the heart of their father was left behind at Crushing Ballcourt. His sons then said to him: “Here you will be called upon. It shall be so.” Thus his heart was comforted. “The child who is born in the light, and the son who is begotten in the light shall go out to you first. They shall worship you first. Your name shall not be forgotten.449 Thus be it so,” they said to their father when they comforted his heart. “We are merely the avengers of your death and your loss, for the affliction and misfortune that were done to you.” Thus was their counsel when they had defeated all Xibalba. Then they arose as the central lights. They arose straight into the sky. One of them arose as the sun, and the other as the moon. Thus the womb of the sky was illuminated over the face of the earth, for they came to dwell in the sky. The four hundred boys who had died at the hands of Zipacna also rose up to become their companions. They became a constellation of the sky. 448 The skull of One Hunahpu would have had a mouth, but not a nose or eyes, which would have been only empty holes and sockets. 449 Hunahpu is one of the twenty named days of the Quiché calendar. It is dedicated especially to the memory of ancestors. When there is a death within the family, the patrilineage priest goes to the family shrine on a Hunahpu day that falls after the day of death to pray for the person’s soul (La Farge and Byers 1931, 157-165, 173-175; Bunzel 1952, 280; Schultze-Jena 1954, 71; B. Tedlock 1982, 124-125; D. Tedlock 1996, 286 n. 141). Hunahpu days are also the chosen times to visit the graves of relatives and leave offerings of food, drink, flower petals, or incense. The twins are instituting this practice, beginning with the burial place of One Hunahpu himself. THE CREATION OF HUMANITY450 THIS, then, is the beginning451 of the conception of humanity, when that which would become the flesh of mankind was sought.452 Then spoke they who are called She Who Has Borne Children and He Who Has Begotten Sons, the Framer and the Shaper, Sovereign and Quetzal Serpent: “The dawn approaches, and our work is not successfully completed. A provider and a sustainer have yet to appear—a child of light, a son of light. Humanity has yet to appear to populate the face of the earth,” they said. Thus they gathered together and joined their thoughts in the darkness, in the night. They searched and they sifted. Here they thought and they pondered. Their thoughts came forth bright and clear. They discovered and established that which would become the flesh of humanity. This took place just a little before the appearance of the sun, moon, and stars above the heads of the Framer and the Shaper. THE DISCOVERY OF MAIZE453 IT was from within the places called Paxil454 and Cayala455 that the yellow ears of ripe maize and the white ears of ripe maize came.456 450 lines 4822-4861 451 Literally “planting.” 452 The Aztecs of Precolumbian Central Mexico believed that the earth had passed through five separate creations, each with the intent of forming beings capable of human expression. Only the fifth and final attempt was successful. The Annals of Cuauhtitlán records the Aztec version of the fifth creation: “Thus it is told, it is said: There have already been four manifestations and this one is the fifth age. So the old ones knew this, that in the year 1-Rabbit heaven and earth were founded. And they knew this, that when heaven and earth were founded there had already been four kinds of men, four kinds of manifestations. Also they knew that each of these had existed in a Sun, an age” (León-Portilla 1980, 137). The Popol Vuh is consistent with this tradition in describing five separate creation attempts—the mountains and rivers, the animals and birds, the mud person, the wooden effigies, and now humankind. 453 lines 4862-4939 THESE were the names of the animals that obtained their food457—fox and coyote,458 parakeet and raven.459 Four, then, were the animals that revealed to them the yellow ears of maize and the white ears of maize. They came from Paxil and pointed out the path to get there. Thus was found the food that would become the flesh460 of the newly framed and shaped people. Water was their blood.461 It became the blood of humanity. The ears of 454 Paxil means “broken, split, or cleft.” Father Coto wrote that it refers in particular to the breaking in two of an ear of maize. Paxil is described as an “excellent mountain” filled with the maize that would eventually be used to form the flesh of humanity (p. 194; lines 4886-4889). This was a widespread belief in ancient Mesoamerica, particularly among the Maya (Freidel, Schele, and Parker 1993, 138-139). According to the Central Mexican Codex Chimalpopoca, it was Quetzalcoatl himself who brought the first maize out of the mountain Tonacatepetl (the mountain of our flesh or our sustenance) from which he created the first men (León-Portilla 1980, 122 n. 42). The Pipil of Guatemala relate that maize was discovered when the mountain in which it was hidden was split open by the youngest of the rain dwarfs (Schultze-Jena 1935, 31.33). Contemporary Mam still identify one of their local mountains as Paxil, saying that it is “where a flea brought the first grains of maize through a narrow crevice to give their ancestors corn” (Wagley 1941, 20; Oakes 1951, 244; Watanabe 1992, 67). 455 K'ayala' means “bitter or stagnant water.” This is perhaps related to the notion of the primordial waters of creation which the highland Maya often associate with seawater or brackish ponds, out of which the first mountains emerged. Among modern Quichés, k'ayala' is the water mixed with lime that women use to add to ground maize dough (Akkeren, personal communication). 456 These are the dry ears of maize, ready for harvest. Colors carry great symbolic significance in highland Maya theology. Yellow is associated with the south, misfortune, death, and the dry season (Gossen 1974, 33; Tarn and Prechtel 1990, 75; Watanabe 1992,131, 232 n. 6; Carlsen and Prechtel 1994, 85, 92). White is associated with the north, new life, and the rainy season. This passage may therefore refer to the inauguration of the agricultural cycle of harvest and new growth. This maize ultimately is used to create the flesh of mankind. As a result, the color of the grains may presage man’s destiny to live and die in endless cycles. Modern Quichés also see yellow and white corn as representing female and male identities. Thus at Chichicastenango yellow and white ears are never left lying together to dry in the patio lest they “cohabit” and produce speckled offspring (Bunzel 1952, 45, 50). This passage may thus suggest that the different colored ears will be used to produce the flesh of males and females. 457 The word echa' (food) refers to the principal or staple food upon which a person or animal depends for survival. In the case of the Quichés this would be maize, by far the most important part of their diet. 458 Both the fox and coyote are cunning nocturnal animals that the Quichés associate with discovering and digging up hidden or secret things. 459 The bright blue/green parakeet may be connected with the blue sky of day as well as the living green of growing maize. The black raven, in contrast, represents the darkness of night and the interior of the earth where the maize seed is planted, germinates, and first begins to grow. maize entered into their flesh by means of She Who Has Borne Children and He Who Has Begotten Sons. Thus they rejoiced over the discovery of that excellent mountain that was filled with delicious things, crowded with yellow ears of maize and white ears of maize. It was crowded462 as well with pataxte463 and chocolate, with countless zapotes464 and anonas,465 with jocotes466 and nances,467 with matasanos468 and honey.469 From within the places 460 When a male child was born, the seventeenth century Maya of Guatemala burned blood shed from its severed umbilical cord and passed an ear of maize through the smoke. The seeds from this ear were then planted in the child’s name in a specific area of the maize field. Parents used the maize from this small patch of land to feed the child “until he reached the age when he could plant form himself, saying that thus he not only ate by the sweat of his brow but of his own blood as well” (Fuentes y Guzmán 1932-33, I.281. Translation by author). Mothers in Santiago Atitlán place an ear of maize into the palm of their newborns and eat only dishes made from maize while breast-feeding to ensure that the child grows “true flesh.” Once the child is weaned, it is given only food prepared with maize for several months. The Quichés refer to themselves as qas winaq (true people) and consider that they are literally of a different flesh than those who do not eat maize. Fuentes y Guzmán noted the extreme importance of maize in the cultural life of the Maya: “Everything they did and said so concerned maize that they almost regarded it as a god. The enchantment and rapture with which they look upon their maize fields is such that on their account they forget children, wife, and any other pleasure, as though the maize fields were their final purpose in life and the source of their happiness (1932-33, I.xii.3. Translation by author). 461 Humankind is distinguished by having blood, in contrast to the wooden effigies, which lacked it (cf. p. 84; lines 664-665). 462 Tzatz means “thick,” like a particularly concentrated beverage or porridge. It is also used to refer to a room crowded with people or a chest tightly packed with objects. 463 Pataxte (Theobroma bicolor) is an inferior grade of cacao (from which chocolate is made) used to sweeten foods and drinks, such as the maize-based drink chorote. Its name is derived from the Nahuatl pataxtli. 464 The zapote (Lucuma mammosa) is a sweet tropical fruit which grows in warm, lowland areas of southeastern Mexico as well as the Guatemalan coast. It is oblong in shape, measuring 10-15 cm in length. Its skin is tough and brownish-red, while its meat varies from dark red to brown and has a delicious, aromatic flavor. Based on Quiché traditions of its association with the creation and because of its abundant fruit, Father Domingo de Vico chose the zapote to represent the paradisiacal Tree of Life in his writings (Carmack and Mondloch 1983, 207-208). 465 The anona is the collective name for a variety of tropical fruits of the genus Anona. It has a yellowish-green skin with a very sweet yellowish-white pulp and black seeds. 466 Spondias purpurea. A species of sour yellow plum. Its Spanish name, jocote, is derived from the Nahuatl xocotl (sour). 467 Byrosinima crassifolia. A smooth, yellow fruit about the size of a cherry. called Paxil and Cayala came the sweetest foods in the citadel. All the small foods and great foods were there, along with the small and great cultivated fields. The path was thus revealed by the animals. The yellow ears of maize and the white ears of maize were then ground fine with nine grindings470 by Xmucane.471 Food entered their flesh, along with water to give them strength.472 Thus was created the fatness of their arms. The yellowness473 of humanity came to be when they were made by they who are called She Who Has Borne Children and He Who Has Begotten Sons, by Sovereign and Quetzal Serpent. Thus their frame and shape were given expression474 by our first Mother and our first Father. Their flesh was merely yellow ears of maize and white ears of maize.475 Mere food were the legs and arms of humanity, of our first fathers. And so there were four who were made, and mere food was their flesh. 468 Casimiroa edulis. A sour tropical fruit. 469 Honeybees were domesticated by the ancient Maya and are still raised by the Quichés, particularly in the mountain villages surrounding Momostenango. 470 Maize is usually ground two to four times, depending on the fineness of flour or meal desired. To grind the maize nine times would make an extremely fine consistency of flour. The number also carries great ritual significance to the Maya, being the number of moons (months) required to form a human child in the mother’s womb. 471 Xmucane acts as the creative power that prepares the maize dough and forms it into a suitable framework to contain the essence of mankind. This is the only instance in which Xmucane acts alone in a creative act without her consort Xpiyacoc. The unique ability of the female to form living flesh is thus emphasized. 472 Openal is “vigor, strength, force, energy.” 473 Q'anal (yellowness) is a metaphor for “abundance, richness, health.” In this case it is likely a metaphor for fatness, paralleling the previous line (Mondloch, personal communication). 474 Literally “placed in words,” an indication that the creators were able to bring their creation to successful completion by means of expressing words, just as in the creation of the earth at the beginning of the account. 475 In Nahuatl, the language of the Aztecs, “our flesh” is tonacoyotl, which is a phrase also used to refer to “maize” (León-Portilla 1980, 122 n. 41). THE FIRST FOUR MEN476 THESE are the names of the first people who were framed and shaped: the first person was Balam Quitze,477 the second was Balam Acab,478 the third was Mahucutah,479 and the fourth was Iqui Balam.480 These, then, were the names of our first mothers and fathers.481 476 lines 4940-4947 477 B'alam Quitze. B'alam is a relatively common Maya name, even today. In its most literal sense, b'alam means “jaguar”; however, when used as a title, it carries with it a host of implicit meanings. Because of the nature of the jaguar as the largest and fiercest animal of the Guatemalan jungle, b'alam is used to refer to anything powerful or mighty. The ancient Maya believed that four balams acted as supernatural protectors in the night (Roys 1967, 152 n. 8). B'alam is also the title used by Itzá-Maya priests who continued to worship the ancient gods after the introduction of Christianity (Roys 1967, 163 n. 2). In addition, balam is sometimes used to refer to priests or rulers with unusual spiritual or magical powers. Kitze appears to be the Mam form of K'iche', meaning “forest,” and the Mam may have played a decisive role in the founding of the Quiché confederation (Akkeren 2000, 155). Thus the name of this progenitor may mean something like “Jaguar Forest,” “Jaguar Quiché,” or “Mighty Quiché.” The etymology of all the progenitors’ names is obscure, however, and I have therefore chosen to leave them untranslated. Balam Quitze was the ancestor of the most powerful Quiché lineage, the Cavecs, from which the ah pop, or principal lord, was chosen. 478 B'alam Aq'ab'. “Jaguar Night” or “Mighty Night.” Ancestor of the Nihaib lineage of the Quichés. 479 Majukutaj. The meaning of the name of this progenitor is problematic. Carmack believes that it is derived from the lowland Maya word for “Traveler,” or “One Who Does Not Stay” (Carmack 1981, 49). Tedlock translates it as “Not Right Now” based on the Quiché ma, “not,” and jukotaj, “right away/in a moment” (Basseta). Akkeren (personal communication) suggests that the name is derived from the Mam jukotaj (elder, eminent one). Coto lists hu cotah as “one crown, ring, or similar round object” (Coto 1983, 474). In many highland Maya languages, such as Tz’utujil, the prefix Ma may be honorific, meaning something like “mister, or sir.” 480 Ik'i B'alam. If this name is derived from lowland Maya languages, which is probable, it would be read as “Black/Dark Jaguar.” If it is derived from Quiché, it should likely be read as Iq'i B'alam, “Wind Jaguar” or “Wind Mighty.” No lineage was founded by this man. Although the Popol Vuh names his wife as Caquixaha, the Título Totonicapán records that he had no wife and therefore had no offspring (Carmack and Mondloch 1983, 175). 481 Although the four progenitors were male, they are referred to as “our first mothers and fathers.” In modern Quiché communities, the highest ranking and most revered patriarchs hold the title of chuch-qajawab (mother-fathers) and are charged with the spiritual well-being of entire family lineages or villages. THE MIRACULOUS VISION OF THE FIRST MEN482 IT is said that they were merely given frame and shape. They had no mother. They had no father. They were merely lone men, as we would say. No woman gave them birth. Nor were they begotten by the Framer or the Shaper, by She Who Has Borne Children or He Who Has Begotten Sons. Their frame and shape were merely brought about by the miraculous power and the spirit essence of the Framer and the Shaper, of She Who Has Borne Children and He Who Has Begotten Sons, of Sovereign and Quetzal Serpent. Thus their countenances appeared like people. People they came to be. They were able to speak and converse.483 They were able to look and listen. They were able to walk and hold things with their hands. They were excellent and chosen484 people. Their faces were manly in appearance. They had their breath, therefore they became. They were able to see as well, for straightaway their vision came to them. Perfect was their sight, and perfect was their knowledge of everything beneath the sky. If they gazed about them, looking intently, they beheld that which was in the sky and 482 lines 4948-5010 483 The Maya perceive themselves as “maize people” and foreigners who eat bread as “wheat people.” Maya language is intimately bound with this concept. To be a qas winaq (true person) and speak the Maya language properly, a person must eat maize. This notion implies that the power of human speech is not merely a means of communication that may be imitated by memorizing grammar and vocabulary, but a function of the physical essence of the Maya as a people. Vogt noted the belief among the Tzotzil-Maya of Chiapas that “unless people eat maize tortillas, they are never fully socialized, nor can they ever speak BAZ’IK’OP (real word—the Tzotzil language) (Vogt 1976, 50). When I first began working as an ethnographer in Quiché communities, I found it curious that when I struck up a conversation in the Quiché language with someone I didn’t know, that person would sometimes interrupt me in mid-sentence and ask what I ate, specifically if I ate tortillas or bread. When I affirmed that I ate what they ate, including tortillas, they would nod as if that explained a great deal. After a number of such experiences I asked a friend why people were curious about what I ate. He replied, “I’ve never heard of anyone that isn’t Maya that can speak our language. I wondered if it was because you ate maize from here. If so then you have the flesh of the ancestors in your flesh and therefore can speak what they spoke.” 484 Cha'om (chosen), in the sense of being “beautiful” in appearance or “pure” (Coto). that which was upon the earth. Instantly they were able to behold everything. They did not have to walk to see all that existed beneath the sky. They merely saw it from wherever they were. Thus their knowledge became full. Their vision passed beyond the trees and the rocks, beyond the lakes and the seas, beyond the mountains and the valleys. Truly they were very esteemed people, these Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam. THE GRATITUDE OF THE FIRST MEN485 THEN the Framer and the Shaper asked them: “What is the nature of your existence? Do you know486 it? Do you not look and listen? Are not your speech and your walk good? Behold now, therefore, and see that which is beneath the sky. Are not the mountains clear? Do you not see the valleys? Try it then,” they were told. Thus their vision of everything beneath the sky was completed, and they gave thanks to the Framer and the Shaper: “Truly we thank you doubly, triply that we were created, that we were given our mouths487 and our faces.488 We are able to speak and to listen. We are able to ponder and 485 lines 5011-5071 486 Na' is “to know, sense, feel.” For the Quichés, to know and to sense something are the same concept. Thus the creators ask the first humans about their knowledge by determining what they see, hear, and feel. 487 Literally “we were mouthed.” In receiving their mouths, the Quiché progenitors thank the creator gods for giving them the means of expressing themselves. It is the ability to speak with intelligible words that distinguishes these new creations from the animals and the failed attempts at humanity which had previously been destroyed. 488 Literally “we were faced.” In Quiché, wach (face, countenance) carries the connotation of individual “self.” If something is pleasing to a person, it is said to “fall well upon the face” (utz kaqaj chuwach). To ask, “How are you?” the question would be phrased, “Is it good your face?” (La utz a wach?). Thus the first people thank the gods for having given them their identity, or sense of self. It is also intimately tied to vision. In the previous section, the first men’s extraordinary vision is what gave them their ability to gain knowledge. to move about. We know much, for we have learned that which is far and near. We have seen the great and the small, all that exists in the sky and on the earth. We thank you, therefore, that we were created, that we were given frame and shape. We became because of you, our Grandmother, and you, our Grandfather,” they said when they gave thanks for their frame and shape. Their knowledge of everything that they saw was complete—the four corners and the four sides, that which is within the sky and that which is within the earth. But this did not sound good to the Framer and the Shaper: “It is not good what they have said, they that we have framed and shaped. They said, ‘We have learned everything, great and small.’” THE DISPLEASURE OF THE GODS489 THUS their knowledge was taken back by She Who Has Borne Children and He Who Has Begotten Sons: “What now can be done to them so that their vision reaches only nearby, so that only a little of the face of the earth can be seen by them? For it is not good what they say. Is not their existence merely framed, merely shaped? It is a mistake490 that they have become like gods. “But if they do not multiply or are increased, when will the first planting be? When will it dawn? If they do not increase, when will it be so? Therefore we will merely undo them a little now. That is what is wanted, because it is not good what we have found 489 lines 5072-5115 490 Lab'e is a “mistake, error, or bad omen.” out. Their works will merely be equated with ours. Their knowledge will extend to the furthest reaches, and they will see491 everything.” Thus spoke Heart of Sky and Huracan, Youngest Thunderbolt and Sudden Thunderbolt, Sovereign and Quetzal Serpent, She Who Has Borne Children and He Who Has Begotten Sons, Xpiyacoc and Xmucane, the Framer and the Shaper, as they are called. Thus they remade the essence of that which they had framed and shaped. THE CREATION OF THE MOTHERS OF THE QUICHÉ NATION492 THEIR eyes493 were merely blurred by Heart of Sky. They were blinded like breath upon the face of a mirror. Thus their eyes were blinded. They could see only nearby; things were clear to them only where they were.494 Thus their knowledge was lost. The wisdom of the first four people was lost there at their foundation, at their 491 Kilon (they see). This form of the verb also has the implied meaning of “acquire, attain.” 492 lines 5116-5360 493 U b'aq' ki wach (its seed their faces) refers to the eyes. Thus the gods clouded the eyes of the first men so that their vision would be limited. 494 Although the creator gods eventually clouded the vision of the first men, the progenitors of the Maya and their descendants nevertheless believe themselves to bear within their blood the potential for divine sight. Present-day aj q'ij priests believe that their divine ancestors, who set the pattern for contemporary rituals, continue to operate through them as conduits. It is this ancestral vision that allows the aj q'ij to “see” beyond the limits of time and distance. Evon Vogt noted that the Tzotzil-Maya of Zinacantán believe that anciently their people could see inside sacred mountains where the ancestors live. Today only shamans are recognized to have this ability (Vogt 1993, 205). Among the Maya there is no institutional religion to sanction the qualification of a person to become an aj q'ij. Every Maya man and woman potentially has this ability because it is inherent in their blood. The approach that experienced aj q'ij priests take in training their apprentices is to teach how to interpret signs and spirit communication, often described as lightning in the blood, that they had always received since young childhood but had not the experience to understand properly. In other cases, the aj q'ij receives no formal training. This account is from an aj q'ij from Santiago Atitlán: “When I was born, I already knew how to do these things. I had no teacher. I speak with the ancestors and ancient kings and they speak with me. They help me to know how to heal and solve problems for people.” Non-Maya do not necessarily have this kind of ability, because their blood does not originate from the same visionary ancestral source. In my own experience working with aj q'ij priests in Momostenango in the late 1970s, my frequent displays of ineptitude in learning divinatory and calendric skills was interpreted as the lack of Maya blood in my veins. I was not able to see with ancestral vision in the same way because I had a different lineage, likely not a very divine one. beginning.495 Thus were the framing and the shaping of our first grandfathers and fathers by Heart of Sky and Heart of Earth. Then their companions, their wives, also came to be.496 It was the gods alone who conceived them as well. As if it were in their sleep they received them. The women were truly beautiful who were with Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam. Thus when the men were brought to life, their wives truly came to be as well. At once their hearts rejoiced because of their mates. These, then, are the names of their wives: Cahapaluna497 was the name of the wife of Balam Quitze. Chomiha498 was the name of the wife of Balam Acab. Tzununiha499 was 495 U xe', u tikarib'al (their root, their planting). 496 Marriage is considered essential in highland Maya society. No significant office may be held by a man or woman who is not married: “Only a married man is regarded as a complete person. On all strictly formal occasions, such as the rituals in the cofradías a man is invariably accompanied by his wife, even when the woman has no part in the ceremonies.... An extreme expression of this sentiment of unity between husband and wife is found in the initiation ceremonies of a chuchqajau [“mother-father,” the principal priest within a lineage]. The profession of chuchqajau is a sacred profession; the practitioner must have a vocation which has been manifested in dreams and in sickness, he is believed to have personal occult power in divination. But at the concluding ceremonies in which the sacred bundle is finally delivered and the final sacrifices are performed, his wife participates in all the ceremonies, not as an assistant, but as an initiate. Throughout the ceremonies they are referred to as ‘the young couple who are to receive the vara [sacred bundle]’” (Bunzel 1952, 122-123; cf. B. Tedlock 1982, 85). The death of one spouse causes significant “soul loss” for the other, often resulting in the widow or widower following their loved one to the grave soon after. Note that the creation of the world itself was carried out by the joint efforts of the female Xmucane and the male Xpiyacoc. They are not described as carrying out separate roles, but acting in concert and speaking with one voice (see pp. 62, 79-82, 200). 497 Kaja Palu Na (Sky Sea House). The Título Totonicapán, also composed in the sixteenth century by Quiché scribes, lists this wife’s name as Cakapaluma (Kaqa Paluma, “Red Sea Turtle”) (Carmack and Mondloch 1983, 175). Each of the wives of the progenitors include the word for “house” in their names, indicating that each is the founder of a lineage group. It is perhaps significant that Cahapaluna uses the lowland Maya spelling of the word for house, na, rather than the Quiché form of the word, ja. The preservation of this spelling may indicate the dimly recalled memory of the royal marriage of their most important Quiché ancestor with a royal princess from lowland Maya lands. 498 Chomi Ja (Shrimp House). This reading is based on chom, “shrimp, large thing, thick thing” (Basseta). If the reading of “shrimp” here is correct, it would parallel the “sea turtle” name of the previous wife based on the account in the Título Totonicapán (Carmack and Mondloch 1983, 175). 499 Tz'ununi Ja (Hummingbird House). the name of the wife of Mahucutah. Caquixaha500 was the name of the wife of Iqui Balam. These, therefore, were the names of their wives, they who came to be our rulers. These were they who multiplied the nations both small and great. This, therefore, was our foundation, we the Quiché people. There were many who came to be bloodletters501 and sacrificers.502 There are no longer merely four now, but four were the mothers of the Quiché people. Each of the people had different names when they multiplied there in the East. Truly these became the names of the people— Sovereign, Ballplayer,503 Masker,504 and Sun Lord.505 These are the titles of the people. It was there in the East that they multiplied. 500 Kaqixa Ja (Macaw House). No lineage group was founded by this couple. According to the Título Totonicapán, Caquixaha was the wife of Mahucutah, the third progenitor, while Iqui Balam was unmarried (Carmack and Mondloch 1983, 175). This is also the name of a Cakchiquel lineage. 501 Aj k'ixb' may literally be translated as “he of the spines”; however, it refers here to the practice of letting blood by auto-sacrifice, paralleling the performance of sacrifice in the next line of the couplet. This was generally accomplished with a sharp spine, such as the tip of a maguey leaf or a stingray spine. Like most Mesoamerican groups, the ancient Maya offered their own blood as an offering to the gods. They believed that by so doing they returned a portion of their life force to the powers of the cosmos. Colonial dictionaries also gloss this as “penitent, confessor, shameful persons.” Such auto-sacrificial acts were performed in an effort to cleanse impurities as a penitential ritual. Although auto-sacrifice is no longer performed, this concept of doing penance, confession, and pleading for cleansing of personal impurities accompanies most offerings of candles, incense, flowers, sacrificed animals, etc. in modern-day Quiché rituals. 502 Aj k'ajb' (sacrificers). K'ajb' is specifically blood sacrifice. Coto lists the word as referring to the type of human sacrifice performed by the Maya prior to the Spanish Conquest, but it may also be a sacrifice of one’s own blood (Coto 1983, 502-503). A related verb may be k'ajij (to wound the knee). When the progenitors perform auto-sacrifice before their gods, it is by pricking their ears and their elbows. Thus this term and the one that precede it likely refer to auto-sacrificial rites whereby a person’s own blood is offered to deity. Ximénez translates k'ajb' as “punishment.” The related word in Classic Maya texts, ch'ahb', has two related meanings with regard to war contexts. In one sense, it refers to the punishment of captives, and at the same time the notion that captives destined for sacrificial death represent a kind of penitence by proxy. Thus Classic Maya lords saw in the person of the war captive their own penance and self-denial. In this way bloodletting and sacrifice represent a kind of penitence by proxy (Stephen D. Houston, private communication). Sacrificial victims were thus seen by the ancient Maya as substitutions for the sacrificer in payment for penitential blood debt (Taube 1994, 669-74). 503 Oloman (place of rubber) is derived from the Nahua word for rubber, ol (Campbell 1983, 84). I base my reading on the fact that for the Quiché, rubber and the rubber ball used in their games is the same word, kik'. There is likely a lineage component here as well, indicating that the ancestors of the Quichés came from, or were related in some way to people who inhabited, the “Place of Rubber.” At the time of the The beginning of the Tamub and the Ilocab506 is known. As one they came from there in the East. Balam Quitze was the grandfather, the father of nine great houses of the Cavecs.507 Balam Acab was the grandfather, the father of nine great houses of the Nihaibs. Mahucutah was the grandfather, the father of four great houses of Ahau Quichés. Thus there were three divisions of lineages508 that existed. The names of their conquest, this was the name commonly used by Nahua speakers to refer to the southern coast of the Gulf of Mexico. Schele and Mathews suggest that the Oloman are related to the Olmeca-Xicalanca, a group centered in the Gulf Coast region who conquered Cholula in the eighth century (Historia Tolteca-Chichimeca), and built Cacaxtla (perhaps Xochicalco as well) as their capital (Schele and Mathews 1998, 293, 383 n. 4). 504 Masks were used by the Quichés in many of their ceremonies and are still worn in ritual dances. By wearing the mask of a god or legendary hero, the dancer takes upon himself the character and power of that figure. 505 K'enech Ajaw (Yucatec: “Sun-eyed/faced Lord”) is the Lowland Maya title given to the principal sun deity (Thompson 1970, 207, 228-229; Morley, Brainerd, and Sharer 1983, 470; Taube 1992, 50-56; Miller and Taube 1993, 106). K'enech Ajaw symbolized the sun’s daily journey across the sky and had been closely associated with the various Maya royal dynasties for more than a thousand years (Miller and Taube 1993, 106; Baudez 1996). In contemporary Yucatán, a deified ruler named Kinich Kakmo (Sun-faced Fire Macaw) was remembered as the founding ancestor of Izamal (Roys 1967, 82, 160 n. 2; Craine and Reindorp 1979, 83-84 n. 78). Apparently, Quiché lords also saw themselves as earthly manifestations of the sun deity. The use of this archaic, non-Quiché title may indicate the antiquity of the concept as well as the origins of its Cavec authors. 506 At the time of the Spanish conquest, there were three main branches of Quiché people: The ruling Nima Quichés (Great Quichés), descendents of the four first human beings just mentioned. They consisted of the Cavec, Nihaib, Ahau Quichés, and the Zaquic; the Tamub Quichés who lived in the area between Santa Cruz el Quiché and Patzite; and the Ilocab Quichés near present-day San Antonio Ilotenago (Carmack and Mondloch 1983, 309 n. 15). The –ab suffix in Ilocab functions as a pluralizer, however, I have chosen not to write the name of this lineage as “Ilocs” because the original derivation of the name is likely ilolkab' (beekeeper), an occupation characteristic of this group (Akkeren, personal communication). 507 There were three major divisions of ruling Nima Quichés (Great Quichés), each descendents of one of the progenitors—the Cavecs, descendents of Balam Quitze who became the dominant ruling lineage of the Quichés centered at their capital at Cumarcah; the Nihaib (or Nim Haib—Great Houses), descendents of Balam Acab who settled the area of Momostenango; and the Ahau Quichés (Lord Quichés), descendents of Mahucutah. The Popol Vuh does not mention any descendents for the last progenitor, Iqui Balam, although a fourth lineage group of Nima Quichés, the Zaquic, is sometimes mentioned. Their founding ancestor is not named in the Popol Vuh text. 508 Chinamit. This is a Nahua-derived word meaning literally “fence,” although it is used to in the Maya highlands as “lineage, family, tribe, or confraternity” (Campbell 1970, 3). grandfathers and their fathers were not forgotten—they who multiplied and proliferated there in the East. The Tamub and the Ilocab came as well, along with the thirteen allied nations, the thirteen houses:509 The Rabinals,510 the Cakchiquels,511 and the Ah Tziquinahas;512 as well as the Zacahs513 and the Lamacs,514 the Cumatz515 and the Tuhalhas,516 the 509 Tecpan. This is a Nahua term meaning “house,” or “royal palace” (Carmack and Mondloch 1983, 233 n. 191). Metaphorically it may also refer to a noble or royal line, as well as the town in which it resides. The remaining groups are non-Quichés, but related highland Maya groups. The principal alliance consisted of four groups—the Quichés, Rabinals, Cakchiquels, and Ah Tziquinahas. The Rabinals live in the area surrounding the modern town of Rabinal.   510 Rab'inal. Akkeren (2000, 248; cf. Campbell 1983, 82) translates the name of this lineage as “Place of the Lord’s Daughter,” based on the Kekchi rab'in (daughter of male/princess) and -al (place of). Their principal center of occupation was in the area around present-day Rabinal. 511 At the time of the Spanish conquest, the Cakchiquels were centered at their capital city of Iximche'. The Tlaxcalan allies of the Spaniards called this citadel Quauhtemallan, from which the present-day name of the country, Guatemala, is derived. 512 Aj Tz'ikina Ja (They of the Bird House) was the dominant lineage of the people today known as the Tzutuhils, who occupied the land from the southern shores of Lake Atitlán south to the cacao-growing land of the Pacific Coast. Their capital was Chiya' (now called Chutinamit), located on a small hill at the base of San Pedro Volcano just across the bay to the northwest of the modern community of Santiago Atitlán. The group was likely composed of two separate lineage groups (the Ah Tziquinahas and the Tzutuhils), which were at times openly hostile to one another (Orellana 1984, 81; Carlsen 1997, 75). The authors of the Annals of the Cakchiquels stated that the Tzutuhils succeeded in temporarily expelling the Ah Tziquinahas from their citadel south of Lake Atitlán in 1521 (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 117). 513 Saq Aj (White Ear of Unripe Maize). 514 The Lamacs, like the Cumatz with whom they are paired in this passage, apparently settled the area of present-day Sacapulas (Recinos 1950, 171 n. 6; Fox 1978, 76). There is a site known as Lamak-Zacapulas approximately five leagues north of Sacapulas (Villacorta and Villacorta 1930, 94; Fox 1978, 90). 515 Kumatz (Serpent). The Cumatz also settled near the present-day town of Sacapulas (Recinos 1950, 171 n. 6). The Cumatz settlement may be the site of Chutixtiox, located on a hill at the center of the Sacapulas basin approximately three kilometers west of the modern town of Sacapulas (Fox 1978, 71-77). The Cumatz were subjugated by the Quichés early in the fifteenth century as part of Lord Quicab’s campaign of expansion (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 93; Recinos 1957, 141). 516 The Tujal Ja (Sweatbath House) occupied the area surrounding the modern community of Sacapulas (Recinos 1950, 171 n. 6; Fox 1978, 76). Fox suggests that the settlement of this lineage may be identified with the ruins of Chutinamit, located just across the river and north of present-day Sacapulas, which once controlled the valuable salt springs nearby (Fox 1978, 81). The Tujalhas were conquered by Lord Quicab in the early fifteenth century at the same time as the rest of the Sacapulas Valley (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 93; 1957, 141-143; Carmack 1973, 369-371). Uchabahas517 and the Ah Chumilahas,518 along with the Ah Quibahas519 and the Ah Batenahas,520 the Acul Vinacs521 and the Balamihas,522 the Can Chahels523 and the Balam Colobs.524 Of these we shall speak only of the nations that became great among the allied nations. They who became great we shall declare.525 There were many others that came out of the citadel after them, each one of them a division. We have not written their names, but they also multiplied there in the East. Many people arrived in darkness in the days of their increase, for the sun was yet to be born. There was no light in the days of their increase. They were all as one, crowded together as they walked there in the East. There was no one to provide for their sustenance. They would merely lift up their faces to the sky, for they did not know where to go. 517 U Ch'ab'a Ja. The name of this lineage could be “House of Arrows” (based on ch'ab'), or “House of Speech” (based on ch'ab'al). These also settled somewhere in the Sacapulas valley (Recinos 1950, 171 n. 6). Fox suggests that their principle settlement was the site of Pacot, approximately nine kilometers west of Sacapulas at the far edge of the Sacapulas Valley (Fox 1978, 84-87). 518 Aj Ch'umila Ja (They of the Star House). 519 Aj Q'ib'a Ja (“They of the Clever House). Q'ib' is “sharp, clever, student.” 520 Aj B'atena Ja (They of the Ballgame Yoke House). 521 Akul Winaq (Acul People). 522 B'alami Ja (Jaguar House). This lineage is clearly identified as the inhabitants of Aguacatán in a 1739 land-dispute document (Carmack 1978, 207). Their principal Precolumbian settlement was Tenam, located approximately three kilometers east of Aguacatán (Fox 1978, 101-107). This area was conquered by Lord Quicab at the same time as his campaign in and around Sacapulas (Carmack 1953b, 188; 1957, 145). 523 Kan Chajeleb' (War Captive Guardians). 524 B'alam Kolob' (Jaguar Rope). 525 It is important to remember that the Popol Vuh was written by representatives of the Nima Quiché nobility and there was little attempt at objective “history” in the modern sense. The authors’ purpose in compiling this record is, at least in part, to bolster the legitimacy and traditions of their own lineages, often at the expense of their neighboring rivals. This they did for a long time there among the magueys; among the black people and the white people, the people of many appearances and many tongues.526 They were destitute in their existence at the edge of the sky’s foundation. And there were mountain people. They were hidden, and without homes. Only among the small mountains and the great mountains did they go. It is as if they were lacking in direction,527 as they used to say. It is said that in those days they quarreled with the mountain people. There they looked for the coming forth of the sun, when they had one common language. They did not yet call upon wood or stone.528 They remembered the word of the Framer and the Shaper, of Heart of Sky and Heart of Earth, it was said. They would merely plead for their heartening, their sowing and their dawning.529 These were people of esteemed words, of esteem, of honor, and of respect.530 They would lift up their faces to the sky as they pleaded for their daughters and their sons: “Alas, you, Framer, and you, Shaper: Behold us! Hear us! Do not abandon us. Do not allow us to be overthrown.531 You are the god in the sky and on the earth, you, Heart 526 I take this passage to mean that the area in which the progenitors lived was cosmopolitan, with diverse ethnic and language groups. It is unlikely that this is a description of the Quichés themselves because in the next section they describe themselves as being unified, with a common language. 527 Ch'u'j refers to someone who is “wayward, erratic, insane, or mad.” 528 As described later in the text, the gods did not manifest themselves as wooden or stone images until after the first dawn (pp. 229-230; lines 6137-6140). 529 This triplet recalls the purpose of the creation in which the creator deities were described as “hearteners” or “they who remember” (p. 66 n.44; lines 83-85), providing the foundation for the ultimate “sowing” and “dawning” of mankind (p. 71; lines 196-197). 530 In the creation account, the gods hoped to be able to provide people on the earth who would “honor and respect” them (p. 78; lines 454-455). This is another indication that the progenitors fulfilled the requirements set forth by the gods that successful people should have the capacity to worship them in an appropriate manner. “Honor and Respect” were also the names given to the ballcourt of Hun Hunahpu (p. 119; lines 1969-1972). 531 Pisk'alij is “to turn inside out” (Basseta). of Sky, Heart of Earth. May our sign, our word,532 be given for as long as there is sun and light.533 Then may it be sown, may it dawn. May there be true life-giving534 roads and pathways. Give us steadfast light that our nation be made steadfast. May the light be favorable that our nation may be favored. May our lives be favored so that all creation535 may be favored as well. Give this to us, you, Huracan, Youngest Thunderbolt, and Sudden Thunderbolt,536 Youngest Nanavac and Sudden Nanavac,537 Falcon538 and Hunahpu,539 Sovereign and Quetzal Serpent,540 She Who Has Borne Children and He Who Has Begotten Sons,541 Xpiyacoc and Xmucane, Grandmother of Day and Grandmother of Light.542 Then may it be sown. Then may it dawn,” they said. 532 Etal (sign) and tzijel (word, as well as the act of lighting a candle or torch) when paired together refer to the posterity of children and grandchildren (Coto). 533 This is a common Quiché expression for “eternity” or “forever.” 534 Raxal. Literally “greenness” in the sense of being invigorating, refreshing, or life-giving. 535 Winaqirem may refer to “humanity,” but it is also the name given to “creation” itself, including the mountains, rivers, and animals. On pp. 65-66 (lines 80-81), it is paired with “life” as the ultimate goal of deity. 536 These three deities combined are referred to as “Heart of Sky” (see p. 70; lines 183-189). 537 The name is likely derived from the Nahua a (water), and nawak (near, close), giving the reading of “close to water” (Campbell 1983, 84). Schultze-Jena identified Nanavac with the Mexican god Nanahuac/Nanahuatzin, a lightning deity who opened a cleft in the sacred mountain Tonacatepetl (Mountain of our Sustenance) to reveal maize (1944, 187; León-Portilla 1980, 142-143; Edmonson 1971, 5188-5192; D. Tedlock 1996, 294). This mountain is analogous to the mountain Paxil, wherein was discovered the maize that would become the flesh of the first humans (pp. 193-194; lines 4862-4881). Nanahuac was also the name of the ugly god who threw himself into the divine fire at Teotihuacan in order to be transformed into the fifth sun, or the sun of this present age. In this latter role, he was closely related to Quetzalcoatl (León-Portilla 1963, 43-44; 1980, 143 n. 86; Akkeren 2000, 162, 333; Townsend 2000, 128-129). 538 This is likely a reference to the falcon deity, a messenger from Heart of Sky, that watched over One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu at their ballcourt (see p. 114; lines 1786-1796). 539 One of the Hero Twins, brother of Xbalanque. 540 Two of the creator deities (see pp. 61, 68-70; lines 24-25, 139-154). Then they fasted and cried out in prayer. They fixed their eyes firmly on their dawn, looking there to the East. They watched closely for the Morning Star,543 the Great Star that gives its light at the birth of the sun. They looked to the womb of the sky and the womb of the earth, to the pathways of framed and shaped people. Then spoke Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam: “We shall surely await the dawn,” they said. They were great sages and wise men,544 bloodletters and honorers, as they are called. There did not exist then wood or stone to watch over our first mothers and fathers. They were therefore weary in their hearts as they awaited the dawn. There were many nations then, there with the Yaqui people,545 the bloodletters and sacrificers. “Let us go and search, to look for one who may protect us. We may find one before whom we may speak. For here we only feign existence and there is not a guardian for us,” said therefore Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam. They heard news of a citadel and there they went. 541 Titles for the ancestor couple, Xmucane and Xpiyacoc (see p. 200; lines 5107-5110). They are arranged in reverse order, or as a chiasm, with the names of the grandparent deities that follow. 542 These are titles for the grandmother goddess Xmucane (see pp. 79-80; lines 508-517). 543 Ik'oq'ij (passes before sun) is the planet Venus as morning star. 544 Eta'manel (sage) is one who understands or knows by means of thinking; na'onel (wise person, knower) is one who knows by means of the senses. We might use the terms “thinking” and “sensing,” but for the Quichés these are both related aspects of “to know.” 545 Yaqui is the Quiché name for the inhabitants of ancient Mexico. THE ARRIVAL AT TULAN546 THIS, then, is the name of the mountain that they went to. Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam, along with the Tamub and the Ilocab, arrived at Tulan547 Zuyva.548 Seven Caves and Seven Canyons549 was the name of the citadel. There they arrived to obtain their gods. 546 lines 5361-5374 547 Tulan (Nahua Tullan or Tollan: “Place of Cattail Reeds”). In the Quiché language, tulan is a “palace, or manor-house” (Basseta), while tolan is a city or house that has been abandoned, perhaps referring to the ruins of once great cities that dot the region and that belong to the legendary ancestors of the Maya people. In Aztec theology, Tollan was a mythic place located near Coatepec (Snake Mountain) where the ancestors of the Mexica received their patron god Huitzilopochtli. In this myth, Tollan was inhabited by the Toltecs, great sages who invented the sciences of astronomy, calendrics, agriculture, and medicine, as well as the arts of writing, painting, sculpture, metalwork, jade carving, and weaving (see footnote 102). Throughout Mesoamerica in the late Postclassic era (ca. 1200-1524), the legendary Toltecs were the bearers of political legitimacy. The Aztecs used the name Tollan to refer to their own legendary place of origin, as well as a general term for “city.” Thus Tollan was an alternative name for the ancient Aztec capital city Tenochtitlan, as well as Tula in Hidalgo, Teotihuacan, Cholula, and Chichen Itza (Schele and Mathews 1998, 38-39; Akkeren 2000, 62, 88). The Tulan mentioned here was likely either Chichen Itza, a major center of power during the Terminal Classic (800-900) and Early Postclassic (900-1200) periods, or its successor Mayapan (Recinos 1950, 63-69; Recinos and Goetz 1953, 65 n; Fox 1978, 1-2, 119-121; Carmack 1981, 46-48). Both would have been “across the sea” (the Gulf of Mexico) with respect to the Guatemalan highlands as described in the Popol Vuh (see pp. 221, 255-256, 259). 548 Suywa (Nahua: “Bloody Water”; Yucatec: “Confusion”). Suy, in lowland Maya languages, is a “whirlpool,” or something twisted. Suywa is “confusion,” and suywa t'an is “figurative or rhetorical language.” In the Book of Chilam Balam of Chumayel, the “language of Suywa” refers to a series of riddles and plays on words that only true lords are able to solve to prove their legitimacy (Roys 1967, 88-98). In Nahua, Zuyua is “Bloody Water,” a reading that is specifically recognized elsewhere in the Chilam Balam of Chumayel (Edmonson 1986, 172 lines 3580-3582). The Annals of the Cakchiquels agrees with the Popol Vuh in locating this area with the “Tulan in the East” (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 53). In the Yucatec Maya Books of Chilam Balam, Zuyua is identified with Xicalanco, an ancient port city on the shores of the Laguna de Términos in the Mexican state of Tabasco (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 53, 216; Campbell 1970, 7; Carmack 1981, 46). 549 The equivalent in Central Mexican mythology is Chicomoztoc (Seven Caves), the legendary origin place of the Early Postclassic Toltecs and the many Nahua groups who claim Toltec ancestry (Davies 1977, 35-37; Tezozomoc 1975, 14-15; Torquemada 1969, I.xiv.36-38). In all likelihood the Seven Caves legend predates the Toltec era. Beneath the Pyramid of the Sun at Teotihuacan is a partially-artificial cave consisting of a central tunnel and six branches that represents in physical form the ancient place of origin (Heyden 1975, 1981; Taube 1986; Millon 1993, 20-22). THE PROGENITORS RECEIVE THEIR GODS550 THEY arrived there at Tulan, all of them. Innumerable people they were when they arrived. They walked in crowds when the gods came out to them in succession. First among them were Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam, who rejoiced: “We have found that for which we have searched,” they said. The god named Tohil551 went out first, carried in his pack frame by Balam Quitze. Then went out the god named Auilix,552 carried by Balam Acab. Next was Hacavitz,553 the name of the god received by Mahucutah. 550 lines 5375-5413 551 Tojil. In the Quiché language, tojil refers to a “payment, debt, obligation, or tribute.” This is consistent with this god’s demand for tribute and sacrifice. Toj is one of the named days in the highland Maya calendar. During divination ceremonies the day Toj implies the need to pay a debt in a metaphoric sense. Barbara Tedlock notes that if a divination falls on the day Toj, this “indicates that one owes (tojonic) in the customs of the Mundo [Spanish “World”] or the ancestors, and by extension one may owe a favor, work, or money to another person. If the client is ill, this means that the pain (c'äx) is a punishment for this debt; the only way to cure it is to pay (tojonic) the Mundo, ancestors, or creditor what is owed, plus a penalty for the neglect” (B. Tedlock 1982, 115). Another possible derivation of the word is from Mixe-Zoque. In that language, toh-mel refers to “thunder” (Campbell 1983, 83). In the Annals of the Cakchiquels, the Quichés are called “thunderers” because they worship this god, supporting this latter reading: Then we asked: “Where is your salvation?” Thus we said to the Quichés. “Since it thunders and resounds in the sky, in the sky is our salvation,” they said. Wherefore they were given the name of Tohohils (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 58). 552 Awilix. In the Quiché language, this would read “you are watched over/cared for/commissioned.” Throughout the text, the Quichés promise to watch over and care for their gods, providing them with offerings, sustenance, and worship (p. 290; lines 8344-8346, 8379-8388). Tedlock suggests that it may be derived from the Kekchi, kwilix/wilix, “swallow” (the bird) and reads the full name as Lord Swallow (D. Tedlock 1996, 297 n. 152). More recently, Akkeren (personal communication) has suggested that the Nihaib lineage originally came from the Pico de Orizaba area, known anciently by its Nahua name Awilizapan. It is possible that Awilix, the patron deity of the Nihaib derived the name of their god from this region and its principle mountain which bore the same name. 553 Jakawitz. Witz is the lowland Maya word for “mountain.” In the Título Yax (Carmack and Mondloch 1989, folio 2r, 107 n. 135), which is far more consistent in their use of the modified Latin alphabet developed by Father Francisco de la Parra in the sixteenth century and used by scribes throughout highland Guatemala, the name of this deity is Q'aq'awitz (Fire Mountain). This suggests that Hacavitz, like Tohil, is primarily a fire deity. This reading is also consistent with the description of his mountain, nima q'aq' ja (great fire house) (see p. 224; line 5905). Another support for this reading is that xq'aqwitz means “yellow Nicacah Tacah554 was the name of the god received by Iqui Balam. Together with the Quiché people, the Tamub also received Tohil. This is the name of the god received by the grandfathers and fathers of the Tamub, as these lords are known today. Third, then, were the Ilocab: Tohil was also the name of the god received by the grandfathers and fathers of the Ilocab, as these lords are known today. THE PROGENITORS LEAVE TULAN555 THUS was the naming of the three Quichés. But in this they freed themselves because it was the same god’s name, Tohil Quiché, for all of them. It was Tohil for the Tamub as well as for the Ilocab. There was only one name for god among them. Therefore the three groups of Quichés were not divided. Three were they who were truly great in their nature: Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz. Then all the nations entered therein—the Rabinals, the Cakchiquels, and the Ah Tziquinahas, along with the Yaqui people, as they are called today. It was there that the languages of the nations were changed. Their languages came to be different. They did not hear each other clearly when they came from Tulan, thus they split apart. They came in crowds from the East. They were alike in the hides that they wore as coverings, for their dress was very poor. They had nothing of their own, but they were wasp” in Mam (Akkeren 2000, 173-174), and the wasp is one of the principle symbols of this god and the lineage of Mahucutah (see p. 245; lines 6783-6787). Alternatively, the authors of the Título Totonicapán write the name as Jaq'awitz (Lying Down/Recumbent Mountain). 554 Nik'akaj Taq'aj (Center/Middle Plain/Valley). Because Iqui Balam failed to produce offspring, and thus a nation of descendents, this god does not appear again in the Popol Vuh account. The gods of the progenitors are listed as a trinity (Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz) subsequent to this passage.555 lines 5414-5485 enchanted people in their essence when they came from Tulan Zuyva, the Seven Caves and the Seven Canyons, as they are called in the ancient account. They did not have fire, only Tohil. This was the god of the nations when fire was first created. It was not clear how it was created, for the fire was already burning when Balam Quitze and Balam Acab saw it. “Alas, fire has not come to be ours. We shall die of cold,” they said. Then Tohil spoke: “Do not mourn. The fire shall be yours again should you lose it. I have spoken,” Tohil said to them. “Are you not truly god? You are our provider and strengthener. You are our god.” they said when they gave thanks. And Tohil replied: “Very well, I am truly your god. Then be it so. I am your lord. Then be it so,” the bloodletters and sacrificers were told by Tohil. This therefore was the glory556 of the nations, and they rejoiced because of their fire. THE NATIONS ASK FOR THEIR FIRE557 THEN it began to rain while the fire of the nations558 burned brightly. Hail fell thickly on the heads of all the nations and their fire went out because of the hail. Thus 556 Q'aq'al, derived from q'aq' (flame), means “glory, majesty, power.” This incident with the fire thus has far greater implications than simple comfort. It refers to the divine source of power for the Quiché people. Offerings made by contemporary Quiché aj q'ij priests are generally burned, transforming them into smoke that rises into the sky and is suitable for reception by divinity. 557 lines 5486-5601 their fire came to nought. Then Balam Quitze and Balam Acab pleaded again for their fire: “O Tohil, truly the cold has finished us,” they said to Tohil. “Very well. Do not mourn,” said Tohil. Then he brought forth fire. He twist drilled559 inside his shoe. Thus Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam rejoiced as they warmed themselves. But the fire of the nations was extinguished and the cold had nearly finished them. Thus they came to plead for fire from Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam. They could no longer bear it because of the cold and the hail. They shuddered and trembled. There was no life in them because of the shivering of their legs and their arms. Neither could they hold on to anything when they arrived: “Truly we are not ashamed to come before you to ask for just a little bit of your fire,” they said when they arrived. But they were not welcomed, and the nations cursed in their hearts. For now the language of Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam was different. “Alas, is our language now abandoned? What have we done? We are lost. Where were we deceived? We had but one language when we came from Tulan. We had but one 558 At this point the text refers to the Amaq' (Nations) as a distinct entity from the Nima Quiché lineages consisting of an alliance of groups who become the enemies of the Quichés. These are likely a general term for the Poqom and Kekchi speakers of the Verapaz region (Recinos 1950, 171 n. 6; Akkeren 2000, 137), and perhaps the Mam speakers further west who had dominated the Guatemalan highlands prior to the rise of the Quichés. In the Título Totonicapán, they are called the Vucamag (Seven Nations/Tribes). 559 An ancient means of starting new fire, by spinning a wooden stick or drill on a hard wooden surface in order to produce sufficient heat to ignite kindling. origin560 and creation. It is not good what we have done,” said all the nations beneath the trees and beneath the bushes. Then a person561 revealed himself before Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam. This messenger from Xibalba said to them: “Truly Tohil is your god. He is your provider. He is also the substitute and remembrance of your Framer and your Shaper. Do not give, therefore, fire to the nations unless they first give something to Tohil in return. It is not to you that they shall give. Rather your desire must be to go before Tohil. Ask him what they shall give in return for the fire,” said the person from Xibalba. He had wings like the wings of a bat. “I am a messenger from your Framer and your Shaper,” said the person from Xibalba. Thus they rejoiced. Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz became great in their hearts when the person from Xibalba spoke to them. Then suddenly he disappeared before their faces, although he was not destroyed. Then the nations arrived. The cold had nearly finished them. It was thick with hail, with dark storms, and with hoar frost. The cold was too much to be conceived. All the nations covered themselves up, bending over, and crawling on their hands and knees because of the cold when they arrived before Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam. They were greatly troubled562 in their hearts. Sorrowful were their mouths and their faces. 560 Literally “germination.” 561 Father Ximénez, who transcribed the Popol Vuh manuscript, inserted at this point his only commentary anywhere in the text: Demonium loquens cis (Latin: “Demon speaking from here on”). 562 Q'atat is “preoccupied, afflicted, troubled.” THE NATIONS ARE DECEIVED INTO OFFERING THEMSELVES563 THUS they arrived as thieves before the faces of Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam. “Truly, will you not take pity on us? We shall only ask for a small bit of your fire. Has it not been discovered? Has it not been found? Were we not of the same home? We were of the same mountain when you were framed and when you were shaped. Take pity therefore on us,”564 they said. “What then will you give to us if we were to take pity on you?” they asked. “Very well then, we will give precious metal to you,” the nations replied. “We do not want precious metal,” said Balam Quitze and Balam Acab. “What then do you truly want? We plead of you,” said therefore the nations. “Very well, we will first inquire of Tohil, then we shall tell you,” they were told. Then they asked Tohil: “What are the nations to give, O Tohil?” asked Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam. “They have come to ask for your fire.” “Very well then. This is what you will say: ‘Do they not want to give the breast565 beneath their shoulders and their armpits? Do they not desire in their hearts to embrace me—I, Tohil? If they do not want this, then I will not give to them their fire, says Tohil,’ you will say to them. ‘It will have a beginning, but it will not be today that they will give 563 lines 5602-5774 564 Literally “pity then our faces.” 565 This deception is based on a play on words that also works in English. The verb here is tu'nik (to give breast, to suckle, to nurture). On one level, the nations thought they had agreed to support or nurture the progenitors, which might logically be interpreted as a regular tribute of food and other necessities. As will soon become apparent, however, Tohil meant this much more literally in the sense that the nations were to offer their breasts/chests in the form of sacrifice by heart extraction. the breast below their shoulders and their armpits, he says to you.’ This is what you will say.” This is what Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam were told. Thus they spoke the word of Tohil to the nations. “Very well then. The breast shall be given. It is good that we are to embrace him,” they replied. In this way they responded, accepting the word of Tohil. Thus they were never again to increase. “Fine,” they said straightaway. Thus they received fire and they were warmed. There was only one group that stole away the fire from within the smoke. This was the Zotzilaha.566 Chamal Can567 is the name of the god of the Cakchiquels. His image was merely that of a bat. They passed by in the smoke, moving stealthily as they passed. Thus when they arrived to take the fire, the Cakchiquels did not ask for it. They did not give themselves up in defeat as all the nations had done who were defeated.568 Thus the nations gave their breasts beneath their shoulders and beneath their armpits. This, then, was the breast-giving spoken of by Tohil—all the nations were to be sacrificed before him. Their hearts were to be carved out from beneath their shoulders and armpits. This thing had not heretofore been attempted. Thus Tohil foresaw the seizure of glory and majesty by Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam. 566 Sotz'ila Ja (Bat House), one of the principal lineages of the Cakchiquels. 567 Tedlock suggests that this name should be interpreted as “Snake Tooth,” derived from lowland Maya Cholan or Yucatec languages: Cha'am (molar) and Kan (snake) (D. Tedlock 1996, 300 n. 156). 568 This incident may have been included in the text in part to explain the independence and, from the Quiché viewpoint, treachery of the Cakchiquels who rebelled against the Quichés in the time of Lord Quicab. Subsequent to this rebellion, the Quichés were in a state of nearly constant warfare with the Cakchiquels, their former allies (p. 278; lines 7975-7987; Recinos and Goetz 1953, 94-118). The Cakchiquels garnered further animosity by allying themselves with the invading Spaniards under Pedro de Alvarado against the Quichés and other highland Maya groups in 1524 (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 119-121). Now when they came from Tulan Zuyva, they did not eat. They fasted continuously. Yet they fixed their eyes on the dawn, looking steadfastly for the coming forth of the sun. They occupied themselves in looking for the Great Star, called Icoquih,569 which appears first before the birth of the sun. The face of this Green Morning Star570 always appears at the coming forth of the sun. When they were there at the place called Tulan Zuyva, their gods came to them. But it was surely not then that they received their ultimate glory or their lordship. Rather it was where the great nations and the small nations were conquered and humiliated when they were sacrificed before the face of Tohil. They gave their blood, which flowed from the shoulders and the armpits of all the people. Straightaway at Tulan came the glory and the great knowledge that was theirs. It was in the darkness, in the night as well, that they accomplished it. Thus they came. They were pulled up like weeds as they came out from there, leaving the East behind. “This is not our home. Surely let us go to see where we shall begin,”571 said Tohil. He truly spoke to Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam. “You shall 569 Ik'oq'ij (Accompanies/Bears/Passes Before Sun). This is the planet Venus as morning star. Las Casas wrote that “after the sun, which they held as their principal god, they honored and worshiped a certain star (I could not learn which star this was) more than any other denizen of the heavens or earth, because they held it as certain that their god, Quezalcóvatl, the highest god of the Cholulans, when he died transformed into this star” (Las Casas 1967, III, clxxiv, p. 201). Las Casas further noted that the Indians awaited the appearance of this star in the East each day, and that when it appeared their priests offered “many sacrifices and ceremonies,” including incense and their own blood (Ibid.). Although Las Casas could not identify which star this was, native Mesoamerican sources identify the Feathered Serpent deity Quetzalcoatl with Venus (Roys 1967, 159 n. 7; Nicholson 2001, 16, 47, 251-252). 570 Raxa Ik'oq'ij. Rax is “green, new, fresh, sudden, regenerated, revived.” It is unclear whether this refers to the green color of the planet Venus, or whether it refers to the life-generating power of the Morning Star to assist in the birth of the sun. 571 Kojtike' (we plant, we begin). first give thanks. You shall carry out your responsibilities first by piercing572 your ears. You shall prick573 your elbows. This shall be your petition, your way of giving thanks before the face of god.” “Very well,” they said. Then they pierced their ears. They wept as they sang of their coming from Tulan. They wept within their hearts as they came, weeping for Tulan: “Alas, it is not here that we shall see the dawn, when the sun will be born to illuminate the face of the earth,” they said as they came. They merely stayed on the road. The people of each of the nations remained sleeping and resting together on the road. Yet always they looked for the star, the sign of the sun, the sign of the dawn in their hearts when they came from the East. They were truly united574 as they made their journey here, passing through Honor and Respect,575 as it is said today. THE PEOPLE GATHER ON THE MOUNTAIN CHI PIXAB576 THEN they arrived atop a mountain. All the Quiché people gathered together, along with the nations. There they all came and counseled one with another. The 572 Jutik in modern usage is “to insert or pierce,” such as a thread through the eye of a needle, or a string through a series of beads. 573 T'is is “to pierce with a needle,” such as a piece of cloth while sewing. 574 Literally “same face.” 575 This is the place where Hun Hunahpu and his sons played ball (see p. 119; lines 1969-1972). Thus the origin of the progenitors is defined as the homeland of the patron heroes described in the first half of the Popol Vuh text. 576 lines 5775-5796 mountain today is called Chi Pixab.577 This is the name of the mountain. Here they gathered together and here they gave to one another their names: “I am this: I am a Quiché person.” “You, then, are this: Tamub your name shall come to be,” the Tamub were told. Then the Ilocab were addressed: “You are Ilocab. This is the name that shall come to be yours. We, the three Quichés, will not be lost, for our word is one,” they said when their names were given. THEIR SUFFERING ON THE MOUNTAIN CHI PIXAB578 Then the Cakchiquels were given their name. Cakchiquels came to be their name. Also Rabinals came to be the name of that people. And Ah Tziquinahas was the name by which that people are known today. These, then, were the names of they who spoke together. It was there that they came to await the dawn. They would look for the first appearance of the star that precedes the face of the sun when it is born. “We came from there, but we were split apart,” they said among themselves. 577 “Place of Counsel or Instruction.” Carmack identifies this as a mountain on the border between San Andrés Sajcabaja and San Bartolomé Jocotenango (Carmack 1981, 66). Here the nearby territory was divided between the major lineage groups—the Quichés, Tamub, and Ilocab settled the region to the north, centered on the mountain of Hacavitz; the Ah Tziquinahas (Tz'utuhils) settled the coastlands around Lake Atitlán; the Rabinals chose the mountains of the Rabinal basin to the east. The Cakchiquels at this time served as a lineage of vassal warriors and occupied a band of territory situated between the Quichés and the Ah Tziquinahas, centered on the mountains above Chichicastenango. These mountain redoubts were apparently chosen for their defensive potential. 578 lines 5797-5870 This is what preoccupied their hearts as they passed through their great afflictions. They did not have food or sustenance. They would only sniff the bottoms of their staffs to feel as if they were eating. But they did not eat when they came. It was not clear how they passed over the sea to come here. It was as if there were no sea that they had to pass over. They merely passed over on the tops of stones for there were stones on the sand. Thus they named it “Lined Up Stones”; and “Piled up Sand” was also its name. Over these they made their passage here from within the sea. The water divided itself and through it they made their passage here. They were preoccupied in their hearts when they took counsel together, for they had no food. They would drink only atole579 made of maize grains which they had borne to the top of the mountain named Chi Pixab. They had carried only Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz. Thus Balam Quitze observed a great fast along with his wife, named Cahapaluna; the same also did Balam Acab with his wife, named Chomiha; along with 579 Uk' is any kind of drink other than water. In this case the text specifies that it is a drink made from maize, or in other words, an atole. Maize atole is the principal drink offered on ceremonial occasions in contemporary highland Maya society (Bunzel 1952, 45, 233-234; B. Tedlock 1982, 65-66). At Santiago Atitlán, this ceremonial atole is called maatz'. Unlike the usual type of maize drink which is made from watered-down corn dough, maatz' is made from grain that has been toasted and then ground fine before it is mixed with two handfuls of ash and placed in a boiling pot of water. This procedure, the only time that Atitecos grind maize kernels into dry flour, or allow maize to come into direct contact with fire, matches the Popol Vuh description of the underworld lords grinding the burned bones of Hunahpu and Xbalanque “like finely ground corn flour” (Carlsen 1997, 57-59). Because traditionalist Atitecos believe that the preparation of maatz' is fraught with danger, it is carried out under the direction of the Xo', the wife of the head of the confraternity in which it is to be consumed. A confraternity elder blesses her beforehand so that she will not be burned in the process. I was told by a prominent Atiteco that drinking maatz' symbolizes victory over “death and the fires of the underworld” (Christenson 2001, 123-124). The resulting mixture is sometimes addressed as mother’s milk or sperm, both associated with rebirth and regeneration (Freidel et al. 1993, 180). Although confraternity members frequently share food and drink in an atmosphere of informality sometimes bordering on the raucous, they drink maatz' with great solemnity. The highest.ranking confraternity elder present distributes it to those present in order of their rank. As he does so he addressed each by name and title and calls on the patron saint of the confraternity to bless the recipient so that person’s feet, knees, heart, arms, head, and thoughts will have power and nothing untoward will happen to the individual during the year. The great Atiteco culture hero Francisco Sojuel is said to have called maatz' the true ruk'ux way (heart of food) and refused to eat anything else when carrying out important ceremonies (Mendelson 1957, 139). Mahucutah, who observed a great fast with his wife, named Tzununiha; and also Iqui Balam and Caquixaha, which was the name of his wife. Thus they fasted in the darkness, in the night. Great was their sorrow when they were atop the mountain which is called Chi Pixab today. Then spoke the gods there. THE PROGENITORS AWAIT THE FIRST DAWN580 THEN spoke Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz to Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam: “We must go now. We must rise up. For we are not meant to be here. Place us in hiding, for does not the dawn now approach? Would you not be pitiable if we should become the spoils of warriors?581 Make for us a place that we may be with you, O bloodletters and sacrificers, and place each of us there,” they said when they spoke to them. “Very well. Let us arise and search in the forests,”582 they all said. 580 lines 5871-6043 581 Aj lab'al (warriors) is now the word for “savages” in contemporary Quiché usage. 582 Las Casas wrote that the Maya were accustomed to keep their deity images in “rugged places, dark and secret caves” in order to keep them in greater reverence by not having them constantly on public display. On special occasions, the images were carried in procession to the temples where they were placed in sanctuaries (Las Casas 1967, III.clxxvii, 216). It is likely that ancient temples themselves were conceived as effigy mountains and that their elevated sanctuaries represented the cave-like homes of the gods (Vogt 1969, 595; Hill 1992, 6, 91; Stone 1995, 27, 35-36; Bassie-Sweet 1996, 111-131; Schele and Mathews 1998, 43, 417). With the destruction of such temples in the Guatemalan highlands at the time of the Spanish conquest, as well as the subsequent evangelization efforts by Christian missionaries, the more obvious public forms of Precolumbian ceremonialism ceased abruptly in most communities. This did not, however, preclude the continued veneration of traditional Maya deities in cave shrines and other remote locales (Bassie-Sweet 1991, 78-79; Peterson 1993, 175-177; Cervantes 1994, 35). Fuentes y Guzmán lamented in the seventeenth century that the innumerable gods that were once worshiped in highland Maya temples and houses were still venerated in mountain caves where they were given offerings of incense and animal sacrifices (Fuentes y Guzmán 1932-33, 44). Thomas Gage discovered one such deity image in 1635 while Then each of them took his god to be carried on his back. Auilix was taken into a canyon named Hidden Canyon, a great canyon in the forest. Pa Auilix583 is its name today. There he was left. He was left in the canyon by Balam Acab. He was the first to be left. Then Hacavitz was left on top of a great fire house.584 Hacavitz is the name of the mountain today.585 This they made their citadel, and this was where the god’s dwelling serving as a priest in Mixco, Guatemala. The image was sequestered in a cave near a spring and a large pine tree: When we came to it, we made very little more search, for near at hand was the cave, which was dark within, but light at the mouth. We found there more earthenware, with ashes in them, which assured us some frankincense had been burned. We knew not how far the cave might reach within, nor what might be in it, and therefore with a flint we struck fire and lighted a couple of candles and went in. At the entrance the cave was broad, and went a little forward, but when we were in, we found it turn on the left hand towards the mountain, and not far, for within two rods we found the idol standing upon a low stool covered with a linen cloth. The substance of it was wood, black shining like jet, as if it had been painted or smoked; the form was of a man’s head unto the shoulders, without either beard or mustachios. His look was grim with a wrinkled forehead and broad startling eyes (Gage 1958, 280-281). The image was surrounded by offerings of money, plaintains and other fruits, candles, pots of maize, honey, and little dishes of incense, the same offerings the Maya gave to the saints’ images in the community church. Gage removed the image and publicly destroyed it the following sabbath, to the horror of those who worshiped it. Maya cave rituals remained for centuries a parallel theological system with that of the Roman Catholic church’s pantheon of saints and deities and it continues to be an important element of traditional Maya worship in some communities (La Farge 1947, 124-128; Oakes 1951, 7; Vogt 1970, 13; B. Tedlock 1986, 128; Christenson 2001, 78-91). 583 Pa Awilix. “Place of Auilix.” 584 The manuscript reads hun nima cae ha (a great fire/red house). This is likely not a proper name because of the initial article hun (a, one), which indicates that this is a descriptive phrase. Tedlock suggests that this is a pyramid temple (D. Tedlock 1996, 159). This is a good reading, particularly because the ancient Maya often painted their temples red and considered them to be effigy mountains. I am not wholly convinced, however, that this wasn’t a true mountain, or in this case a volcano (fiery mountain) as the authors suggest that it existed in their day as a recognized and named mountain place, identified in the same way as the mountains of the other two gods, Tohil and Auilix. Carmack and Fox identify this mountain with the site of Chitinamit, a fortified settlement located on a high hill at the western edge of the Chujuyup Valley overlooking the Queca River (Fox 1978, 57-58; Carmack 1981, 65). Although separate hilltop sites, Hacavitz, Pa Tohil, and Pa Auilix are mutually visible from one another. The Chujuyup region is rugged and relatively poor for agriculture, suggesting that it was chosen more for its defensive potential. Akkeren concurs that Pa Tohil and Pa Auilix were located in the Chuyup Valley, however, he suggests that Hacavitz was located south of Chichicastenango (Akkeren 2000, 42). came to be. Hacavitz it was called. Mahucutah did not leave his god behind, therefore.586 This was the second god that was hidden by them. It was not in the forest that Hacavitz dwelt, but rather it was on a cleared587 mountain where Hacavitz was hidden. Then came Balam Quitze. He arrived there in the great forest to hide Tohil. Pa Tohil588 is the name of this great mountain today. Then they named the hidden canyon Healing Tohil.589 It was crowded with snakes as well as jaguars, rattlesnakes and pit vipers. There in the forest they were, hidden by the bloodletters and sacrificers. They were as one, Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam. As one they awaited the dawn there on top of the mountain called Hacavitz. Nearby was the god of the Tamub, along with the god of the Ilocab. Amac Tan590 was the name of the place where the god of the Tamub was. There it dawned. Amac 585 Jakawitz in Cholan languages means “First/Beginning Mountain” tying it to the first mountain of creation. In Quiché, the verb jaq means “to open,” which may recall the mountain of Paxil (Split Mountain) that contained the maize used to create the first human beings (see pp. 193-194; lines 4862-4939). In the Título Yax (Carmack and Mondloch 1989, folio 2r, 107 n. 135), which is far more consistent in their use of the modified Latin alphabet developed by Father Francisco de la Parra in the sixteenth century and used by scribes throughout highland Guatemala, the name of the deity placed on the mountain is Q'aq'awitz (Fire Mountain). This suggests that Hacavitz, like Tohil, is primarily a fire deity. This reading is also consistent with the description of his mountain, nima q'aq' ja (great fire house). 586 The god Hacavitz was not left behind, because his sanctuary was located within the settlement of the Quiché people, rather than in the mountains and forests as the other two gods had been. 587 Saq. This may be “white, clear, pure.” Although there are a great number of white mountains in the highlands, due to the prevalence of lime deposits in the soil, this is more likely to be read as “cleared or bald,” since it has already been described as red in color. The first citadel of the Quichés was built atop this mountain, necessitating the clearing of its trees and undergrowth if it was not deforested already. 588 “Place of Tohil.” This is likely the mountain still known today as Pa Tojil, located on the south side of Chujuyup Valley (Fox 1978, 58; Carmack 1981, 65). 589 “Healing/Medicine Tohil.” Quiché aj q'ij priests frequently go to mountain shrines to perform healing ceremonies at specific shrines dedicated to certain deities, or the lords of days of the traditional calendar. 590 Amaq' T'an. Amaq' is “nation;” T'an is “bald, lacking plumage.” Most likely, however, this is an alternate or archaic spelling for the Tamub lineage. Thus the name of the place is simply “Nation of the Tamub.” The Tamub lineage has a significant Pokom component, and in that language, Tamub may be read simply as “the descendents” (Akkeren 2000, 125). Carmack identifies this site with a series of ruins known Uquincat591 was the name of the place where the Ilocab dawned. The god of the Ilocab was there on a nearby mountain. There all the Rabinals,592 the Cakchiquels,593 and the Ah Tziquinahas,594 all the small nations and the great nations, arose as one. There was but one dawn. As one they awaited the coming forth of the Great Star, named Icoquih. “First it will come forth before the face of the sun. Then it shall dawn,” they said. They were as one, Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam. They did not sleep. They did not rest. Greatly did they weep in their hearts, in their bowels, for the dawn and for clarity. They came there surely as penitents, in great sorrow and great humility. They trembled because of the afflictions that they had passed through. “Our coming has not been sweet. Alas! Would that we could behold the birth of the sun. What have we done? We were united in our mountains, but our natures have been changed,” they said. They spoke a great deal among themselves concerning their sorrow, their humility, and their fervent prayers.595 Thus they spoke, for their hearts had yet to be comforted in the dawn. as Cruz Che located along a slope of Telec'uch Mountain west of Hacavitz. The remains of a deity shrine still known by its ancient name, Saqirib'al (Place of Dawn), is located on a peak of the mountain (Carmack, Fox, and Stewart 1975, 66-70; Fox 1978, 57; Carmack 1981, 65). 591 Amaq' U Q'in K'at (Nation Its Frame Net). Carmack suggests that this site was located on a slope of Telec'uch Mountain, separated from Amaq' T'an by a river canyon (Carmack 1981, 65). 592 The Rabinals in this era settled the mountains above Joyabaj. 593 At this phase of their history, the Cakchiquels occupied the mountain region above the present-day town of Chichicastenango. 594 It is likely that this lineage had already begun to settle the southern shores of Lake Atitlán, which would remain the center of their territory into modern times. But these, the gods, were comforted in the canyons and the forests. They were placed in bromelia flowers and hanging moss596 rather than on altars.597 Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz spoke from the first. Great was their day, their breath, and their spirit, above all the gods of the nations. Manifold were their spirit essences, their pathways, and their victorious means of chilling and frightening the very existence and hearts of the nations. Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam gave comfort to the gods. They were not unhappy, nor did they bear ill will in their hearts for the gods that they had carried. These they had carried when they came from Tulan Zuyva, there in the East. But they were in the forest. There was the place of dawning on Pa Tohil, Pa Auilix, and Pa Hacavitz, as they are called today. It was there that our grandfathers and fathers were sown, when they dawned. Now we shall tell of the dawning and the appearance of the sun, moon, and stars. THE APPEARANCE OF THE FIRST DAWN598 THIS therefore is the dawn,599 the appearance of the sun, moon, and stars. 595 Literally “weeping and crying out.” This is a standard couplet used by contemporary Quichés to refer to ritual prayer. 596 Atz'iaq (hanging moss/Spanish moss). An epiphytic plant (Tillandsia usneoides) that forms long grayish green filaments that hang from trees in tropical environments. It is in the same family of plants as the bromeliads. 597 Tz'alam (Flat boards, flat stones). Most highland Maya altars constructed in the mountains consist of slabs of flat stones arranged into a table-like form, or alternatively, wooden tables. 598 lines 6044-6289 599 Throughout Mesoamerica the first dawn of the sun is a symbol, not only for the birth of a new age, but for the divine sanction of power to a lineage or allied group (León-Portilla 1969, 30-31; Akkeren 2000, 164). GREATLY they rejoiced, Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam, when they saw the Morning Star. It came forth glittering before the face of the sun. Then they unwrapped their copal incense, for the sun was to come forth. They unwrapped it with victory in their hearts. There were three types of incense that they burned as a means of expressing the gratitude in their hearts: Mixtam600 Incense was the name of the copal incense carried by Balam Quitze. Caviztan Incense was the name of the copal incense carried by Balam Acab. And Cabavil601 Incense, as it is called, was carried by Mahucutah. These three were the copal incenses that they burned, waving their censers toward the rising sun. They wept bitterly as they waved their censers, burning the sacred copal incense before they saw and witnessed the birth of the sun. And when the sun came forth, all the small animals and great animals rejoiced. They came up from the rivers and from the canyons. They were there on the mountain peak. As one they turned their faces toward the coming forth of the sun. Then the pumas and the jaguars cried out. The first bird to sing was the parrot, as it is called. All the animals truly rejoiced. The eagles and the white vultures, all the small and great birds, spread their wings. The bloodletters and sacrificers were kneeling. They greatly rejoiced along with the bloodletters and sacrificers of the Tamub and the Ilocab, along with the Rabinals and 600 Campbell (1981) derives Mixtam from the Nahua mixtan (Place of Clouds); Carmack and Mondloch (1983, 232 n. 187) cite Domingo de Vico, who wrote that mictan ajaw was a “demon,” although this description was undoubtedly colored by Father Vico’s Roman Catholic bias. Edmonson derived mixtam from mictlan, Nahua for the underworld. 601 K'ab'awil (god, divine). Classes of copal incense called K'ab'awil and Mixtam are still sold in Chichicastenango (Schultze-Jena 1954, 91). the Cakchiquels, the Ah Tziquinahas and the Tuhalhas, the Uchabahas and the Quibahas, the Ah Batenas and the Yaqui Tepeus. However many nations there are today, innumerable people, they all had but one dawn. Then also the face of the earth was dried by the sun. Like a person was the sun when he revealed himself. Hot was his face and thus he dried the surface of the earth. Before the sun had come forth the face of the earth was wet; it was soggy prior to the coming forth of the sun. But when the sun ascended upward, he was like a person. His heat could not be endured. This was but his self-revelation when he was born. What is left is but a mirror. What appears now is not the true sun, according to their account. Then straightaway Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz became stone, along with the sacred images of the puma and the jaguar, the rattlesnake and the pit viper. Zaqui Coxol602 took them and hid himself in the trees. When the sun, moon, and stars appeared, 602 Saqi K'oxol (white/noisy/lively person). According to Basseta, this is the name given to any frightening spirit or phantasm, but specifically the duende, a dwarf-like denizen of the mountains and forests that the highland Maya believed to be the guardian of animals and messenger of the earth deity. Coto identifies him as a phantasm associated with mountains: “The duende who walks in the mountains they call: ru vinakil che [the person/personification/manifestation of tree], or çaki qoxol” (Coto 1983, 355.356). In the Annals of the Cakchiquels, he appears as a spirit within the Volcano of Fuego: Afterwards they left there, they left Chiyol and Chiabak, and twice they traveled their road, passing between the volcanoes which stand abreast, those of Fuego [Fire] and Hunahpu. There they met face to face the spirit of the Volcano of Fire, he who is called Zaquicoxol. “Verily, the Zaquicoxol has killed many, and it is surely terrifying to see this thief,” they said. There, in the center of the Volcano of Fuego was the guardian of the road by which they arrived and which had been made by Zaquicoxol (Recinos and Goetz 1953b, 61). Stories about Saqi K'oxol are common in highland Guatemala today as well, where he is described as a mountain spirit. At times he can be merely mischievous, playing tricks on people for his own entertainment. He can also be quite dangerous or deadly if proper respect is not shown to the wild things of the mountains or to the earth god himself (Tax 1947; Bode 1961, 213; Cook 2000, 201). In the popular dance drama, “The Dance of the Conquest,” performed by the Maya throughout the highlands, one of the main characters is K'oxol, who successfully predicts the Spanish conquest through a divinatory ceremony. Following the Conquest, he refuses baptism and escapes into the forest where he gives birth miraculously to the son (portrayed as a small doll dressed in red) of Tecum, the great Quiché warrior who died fighting the Spaniards (Bode 1961; Baile de la Conquista 1991; B. Tedlock 1982, 149-150). In Momostenango, the K'oxol is the patron of aj q'ij priests, the source of the divination power that awakens their blood (B. they all turned to stone. Perhaps we would not be alive today because of the vicious603 animals—the puma and the jaguar, the rattlesnake and the pit viper, as well as Zaqui Coxol. It would not be our day if the sun had not come forth and turned the first animals to stone.604 Great was the joy in the hearts of Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam when it dawned. There were not many people then. There were only a few on top of the mountain of Hacavitz. There they dawned and there they burned incense, waving their censers toward the coming forth of the sun. This was their mountain, their plain. There came they who are named Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam. There they multiplied on the top of the mountain that was to become their citadel. There it was that the sun, moon, and stars truly appeared. Everything on the face of the earth and beneath the sky had its dawn and became clear. Thus began their song called Our Burial.605 Their hearts and bowels wept as they sang. And this is what they said in their song: “Alas we were lost! At Tulan we split ourselves apart. We left behind our older brothers and our younger brothers. Where did they see the sun? Where were they when it dawned?” Tedlock 1982, 147-148; B. Tedlock 1986, 135; Cook 2000, 201). As such he represents the ancient power of traditional Maya worship, a survival of the world prior to the Spanish conquest. It is interesting that even for the Precolumbian Quichés, Saqi K'oxol was a survivor from a previous age. 603 Literally “biting.” 604 Barbara Tedlock notes that this tradition is still remembered in the community of Momostenango: “One diviner I know possesses the stone shoe of the original C’oxol or Tzitzimit; he found it in the mountains near Chinique and keeps it with his divining seeds and crystals. He explained that at the time the earth became hard, the Tzitzimit was hiding in a tree and dropped his shoe. Like the animals, it turned to stone. Momostecan diviners visit Minas, a foothill of the Cuchumatanes, where they find small stone concretions that are the animals who were turned to stone by the sun dring the creation of the world. These concretions are placed in the family shrine called the mebil” (B. Tedlock 1982, 148). 605 Muq is “to be buried, covered, or hidden by earth, fog, cloud, etc.” This they sang concerning the bloodletters and sacrificers of the Yaqui people. Tohil is the god of the Yaqui people, who they call Yolcuat Quitzalcuat.606 “We were separated there at Tulan Zuyva. We left them to come here. But we were complete607 before we came here.” This they said among themselves when they remembered their older brothers and their younger brothers, the Yaqui people. These dawned there in Mexico, as it is called today. Thus surely a portion of them remained there in the East, they whose names are Tepeu608 and Oliman.609 “We left them behind,” they said. Thus they were greatly troubled in their hearts there on top of Hacavitz. The Tamub and the Ilocab felt the same. They whose name was Amac Tan were merely in the forest when the bloodletters and sacrificers of the Tamub dawned with their god. Tohil is the sole name for the god of the three groups of Quiché people. This is also the name for the god of the Rabinals. Only a little bit different is his name: One Toh being the name of the god of the Rabinals. They say it this way because of their desire to make it one with the language of the Quichés. 606 Yolcuat (Nahua: yol—heart, coat—serpent) Quetzalcoatl (Nahua: quetzal—quetzal bird, quetzal feathers, coat—serpent). Quetzalcoatl, generally translated as “Feathered Serpent,” was a prominent deity in the pantheon of the Central Mexican Toltecs and Aztecs. Here the authors of the Popol Vuh suggest that this god of the Yaquis (Mexicans) was equivalent to their own patron deity, Tohil. 607 Literally “its completetion/wholeness/perfection our faces.” 608 Tepeu. This people’s name is derived from Nahua, meaning “sovereign, power.” 609 Oliman (Rubber People/Ballplayers). This is likely a reference to the Olmeca-Xicalanca from the area of the southern Gulf Coast (see footnote 503). There the language of the Cakchiquels was changed, for when they came from Tulan Zuyva, the name of their god was Chimalcan.610 This was the god received by the Bat House611 people. Along with their god, this lineage also received their titles: Ahpo Zotzil612 and Ahpo Xahil613 they are called. This god changed their speech when he was received there at Tulan. It was a stone that was the cause of the change in their speech when they came from Tulan in the darkness. Yet all the nations were sown as one when the names of the gods were given to each of the groups. We shall now tell of their residence, their sojourn there on the top of the mountain. They were as one, the four of them—Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam. Their hearts cried out to Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz, who were amidst the bromelia flowers and the hanging moss. OFFERINGS ARE MADE TO THE GODS614 THESE, then, are the burnings and the offerings placed beneath Tohil when they went before the faces of Tohil and Auilix. They went there to see them and to worship 610 The authors of the text apparently assert here that the god of the Cakchiquels is the same as theirs, but that he was called by a different name when their language changed. In the Cakchiquel language, chamalqan is a serpent of great size that moves calmly/quietly (Varea). 611 Tzotz'i Ja (Bat House) is the principal lineage of the Cakchiquels. 612 Ajpo Sotz'il (Bat Lords). Ajpo is a contracted form of aj pop (he/she of the mat), the highest office in highland Maya hierarchies, and may be loosely translated as “lord.” See footnote 33 on the significance of the mat. This was one of the principal Cakchiquel ruling lineages at the time of the Spanish conquest. They resided at Iximché. 613 Ahpo Xahil (Dance Lords). The Xahil were the other principal lineage of the Cakchiquels. Their main center of occupation was at Sololá above the northern shores of Lake Atitlán. The Annals of the Cakchiquels was compiled under the direction of the Xahil (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 11). 614 lines 6290-6503 them. They gave thanks before them for the dawn. They knelt humbly with heads bowed low615 before the stones there in the forest. It was only the revelation of the god’s spirit essence that spoke when the bloodletters and sacrificers arrived before the face of Tohil. What they carried was not great, nor were their burnt offerings. It was only pine resin, the remnants of pitch, along with pericón616 flowers that they burned before the face of their god. Then spoke Tohil. It was only his spirit essence that gave knowledge to the bloodletters and sacrificers. Then the gods spoke:617 “It is here that our mountain and our plain shall be. We have come to be yours. Great is our day. Great as well is our birth, because of all your people and all the nations. We shall surely be your companions then, your citadel. We shall give to you your knowledge. Do not reveal us before the nations when they come up to us. For truly they shall become many. Thus do not let them set traps for us. But give to us the children of the grasses and the fallen618 grain. Bring to us a little of the blood of the female deer and the female bird. Take pity on us. Set the skins of the deer aside and watch over them. These shall be a means of concealing identity.619 The deer will become the means by which you shall deceive them. These will surely be our substitutes before the faces of the 615 Wonowoj is to humble oneself, bowing over so severely that the chin touches the knees (Basseta). 616 Iya' (Spanish pericón) is a marigold-like plant with small yellow flowers (Tagetes lucida). 617 From the end of this quotation, it is clear that all three deities—Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz—are speaking, not just Tohil. 618 Grain that has “fallen from age or overripeness” (Basseta). 619 Literally “buried/hidden/clouded face.” nations. When you are asked, ‘Where is Tohil?’ It will be this deerskin bundle620 that you shall show them. But do not reveal yourselves. Do this now and your existence shall become great. You shall conquer all the nations. They must bring to you their blood. Their flowing blood shall be brought before our faces. Let them come to us and embrace us. They are ours now,” said Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz. The gods would appear as boys when they were seen, when offerings were burned before their faces. Thus they began to seek out the offspring of birds and deer which were taken and offered by the bloodletters and the sacrificers. They would find the birds and the young deer, and go to place their blood in the mouths of the stones. Tohil and Auilix drank this therefore. It was the bloody drink of the gods. Straightaway, then, the stones spoke when the bloodletters and sacrificers came to give their burnt offerings. 620 Sacred bundles of this type were well known by the indigenous people of Mesoamerica prior to the Spanish conquest. Fr. Juan de Torquemada cited the existence of a sacred bundle in central Mexico called the Haquimilolli which consisted of clothing believed to have been worn by the god Xolotl when he offered himself as an auto-sacrifice to enable the sun to rise for the first time. The mantles worn by the god were wrapped in a bundle along with certain green stones representing the god’s heart, as well as the skins of a serpent and a jaguar (Torquemada 1969, 6.xlii, 78). In Santiago Atitlán, deerskins are kept in a confraternity house dedicated to traditional Maya ceremonies. These skins, with the head and antlers still attached, are periodically worn in a dance honoring a powerful deity they call Martín, associated with animals, maize, and rebirth. Prior to the dance, a special priest dedicated to the veneration of Martín called the nab'eysil blesses the deerskins, addressing them as “King Martín, Lord of the Three Levels, Lord of Rain, Lord of Maize, and Lord of all the Mountains” (Christenson 2001, 160). Martín is referred to as “King Martín” because he is more ancient than any other god, and father to them all (Mendelson 1957, 462; 1958b, 5). The deer is his specific emblem, and a bundle kept in the confraternity house contains very old garments painted with designs associated with tufts of animal hair. The cult of Martín is likely associated with the ancient god Tohil and his deerskin bundle (Mendelson 1958a, 121, 124). The Great Dance of Tohil took place in the month of Tz'ikin Q'ij, just prior to the principal maize harvest in November, coinciding with the Dance of Martín on November 11 (Christenson 2001, 169-176). The Maya deity Martín is derived from St. Martin of Tours (November 11 is his day on the liturgical calendar), who is often depicted in Roman Catholic paintings and sculpture seated on a horse. The early Maya consistently confused horses with deer (Hill 1992, 151). Even today both animals bear the same name in most Maya languages. They did the same before the deerskin bundles. They would burn pine resin, pericón flowers, and stevia621 flowers. There was a deer skin bundle for each of them on the tops of the mountains. The dwellings and the homes of our ancestors were not in the sun. They walked only in the mountains. And this is what they would eat: Only hornet622 larvae, only wasp larvae, only bee larvae623 would they seek. At first they did not have good food or water. The pathway leading to their homes was not clear. Nor was it clear where their wives dwelt. The other nations were crowded together. All of them would unite, joining together with one another. They would raise a din624 there on the roads. Their paths were clear. But it was not clear where Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam were. When they would see the nations passing by on the roads, they would cry out on the peaks of mountains. They would cry out with the call of the coyote and the call 621 Jolom Okox (Head Mushroom). This is not a mushroom, but an herb called stevia (Spanish pericón blanco), whose small white flowers resemble the head of a mushroom. Duncan Earle noted that the pericón and stevia are still given as minor offerings in rituals by the Quichés (Earle 1983, 294, 297; D. Tedlock 1996, 308 n. 164). 622 Wonon. For modern Quichés this is the honeybee of the stinging type introduced from Europe. Many Quiché communities, particularly in the region around Momostenango, cultivate these bees for their honey. The Precolumbian Maya kept bees and harvested their honey, but these were of a stingless variety. As will become apparent later in the text, these insects could sting. Coto lists wonon as a hornet, or the stinger of a wasp or hornet. 623 Aqal. These are stingless, honey-producing bees that the Maya domesticated. Today the Quichés cultivate the stinging European type of bee for their honey, and aqal is now used to refer to a variety of wasps that live in nests. Nevertheless, many highland Maya languages retain memory of the honey produced by the older varieties of bee when referring to sticky, sweet substances such as honey or molasses, as aqat or aqal. 624 B'olow is the sound of a crowd all speaking at once (Coto). of the fox. They would make the call of the puma and the jaguar. And when the nations heard this there was great discussion about it: “This is merely the cry of the coyote and of the fox,” said the nations. “It is merely the puma and the jaguar,” the nations said. The nations did not realize that these were people.625 It was merely a way of deceiving the nations that this was done. It was not the desire of their hearts to truly frighten them. Thus they would make the call of a puma or jaguar, and then when they would see one or two people out walking, it would be their desire to destroy them. Each day they arrived at their homes with their wives bearing only hornet larvae, wasp larvae, and bee larvae. And each day also they went before Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz, saying in their hearts: “We give merely the blood of deer and birds to Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz. We merely prick our ears and our elbows. We plead for our strength and our endurance to Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz. Who shall be responsible for the death of the nations? Shall we kill them only one at a time?” This they said to each other when they went before Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz. Then they pierced their ears and their elbows before the faces of their gods. They scooped up their blood and rubbed it inside the mouths of the stones. Yet they had not truly become stones. Each of them appeared as young boys when they came. They rejoiced for the blood of the bloodletters and sacrificers. Then came the sign of their deeds: 625 Literally “not like people in their hearts.” “Conquer many lands. This is your authority.626 It came from Tulan when you brought us here,” they were told. Then was given the breast627 at the place called Pa Zilizib.628 And behind629 it came blood, a rain of their blood as an offering for Tohil, along with Auilix and Hacavitz. THE SACRIFICIAL KILLINGS BEGIN630 THIS is the beginning of the abduction of people from the nations by Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam. THEN also was the killing of the nations. They were taken in this way: Only one would go out walking, or two would go out walking. It was not clear how they were taken. Then they would be taken to be sacrificed before the faces of Tohil and Auilix. Afterward their blood and skulls631 would be placed on the road. Thus the nations would say, “a jaguar ate them.” This they would say because only the tracks of a jaguar were left behind. They would not reveal themselves. Many were abducted from the nations until, after a long time, the nations came to their senses:632 626 Literally “self-liberation,” meaning the “authority, sanction, or right to act.” 627 Tz'um (woman’s breast, skin). This continues the play on words whereby the nations were tricked into offering to tu'nik (give the breast, suckle, nurture), a metaphor for nurturing or giving sustenance. In reality, however, they were being tricked into offering their own breasts in the form of heart extraction sacrifice. 628 Pa Silisib' (Place of Staggering/Shaking). 629 This is an oddly-phrased sentence in the original because the authors are continuing with the play on words between breast as “suckling or nurturing,” and the physical breast that is being offered in sacrifice. The authors are saying that “behind” the breast is the source of the blood, and the rain of blood. In other words, that is where the heart is located that will be sacrificially extracted. 630 lines 6504-6597 631 Jolom is the word for both “head” and “skull.” It is impossible to know which is meant here. “Perhaps Tohil and Auilix have come after us. We shall merely seek out the bloodletters and the sacrificers. Let us follow their footprints633 when they go to their homes,” the nations all said when they planned634 among themselves. Thus they began to follow the footprints of the bloodletters and the sacrificers. But they were not clear. They were only deer tracks and jaguar tracks that they would see. Their footprints were not clear. Nowhere was it clear where the tracks began. Their footprints were just like the pawprints of animals.635 It was merely confusion for them. Neither was the pathway clear. None of the nations could see, because there would form clouds, there would form dark rain, there would form mud, and there would form drizzling rain. Thus they would weary their hearts searching. They would mourn, for great was the essence of Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz. Thus this was done for a long time atop the mountain on the borders of the nations. They would kill them when the abductions began. These were murderous assaults when they would seize the people of the nations on the roads. They would then sacrifice them before the faces of Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz. Thus the boys were preserved there on the top of the mountain. Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz had the appearance of three boys when they went out walking. These were the spirit essences of the stones. 632 Literally “felt themselves.” 633 Raqan (their feet/legs). The Quiché language does not distinguish between feet and legs; nor does it distinguish between feet and the tracks they make. 634 Literally “gathered their thoughts.” 635 Pich are the feet (and the tracks they make) of animals, as well as infant humans who crawl on all fours. There was a river where they would bathe along the banks as a way of revealing themselves. And this was what gave it its name: “Bath of Tohil” became the name of the river. Many times the nations would see them, but then suddenly they would vanish. When the people of the nations saw this, they would report where Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam could be found. Thus the nations plotted how to kill them. THE NATIONS PLOT TO SEDUCE THE GODS636 ABOVE all else, the nations desired to plan for the defeat of Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz. All the bloodletters and sacrificers spoke before the nations. They assembled themselves together, summoning all of them. Not one group, nor two groups, were left behind. All of them gathered together, summoning one another. Then they gathered their thoughts. They spoke, asking one another: “What would ensure the defeat of the Cavec Quiché people? For the children of our mothers, and the sons of our men are finished. It is not clear how they caused the loss of these people. But if these abductions continue we shall be finished. If Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz are to become great and glorious, then Tohil shall come to be our god. But we shall be preeminent. They will not succeed in defeating us. Are our people not many? And these, the Cavec, are there not but few of them?” This they asked when they all came together. Then some of them spoke before the nations: 636 lines 6598-6699 “Who, perhaps, are they that bathe by the banks of the river each day? If they are Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz, then we shall surely defeat them first. Thus shall begin the defeat of the bloodletters and the sacrificers,” they said. Then they inquired: “How then will we defeat them?” they asked. “This shall be our means of defeating them: Because the boys appear at the river, let two maidens go there that are truly chosen. They should be the fairest637 of maidens. Thus may they be objects of desire for them,” they said. “Very well then. We shall search for two of the best maidens,” they said. And so they sought among their daughters for the truly fairest of maidens. Then they instructed these maidens: “Go, our daughters, to wash clothes638 at the river. If, then, you see the three boys, undress yourselves before their faces. And if their hearts should desire you, then you shall offer yourselves639 to them. When they shall say to you, ‘we shall come unto you,’ then you shall say, ‘yes,’ when you are petitioned. When they ask, ‘Where do you come from? Whose daughters are you?’ then you shall reply: ‘We are the daughters of lords.’ Then they will give something to you if they should desire you. And if so, then you shall surely give yourselves to them. If you do not give yourselves to them, then we will kill you. But our hearts will be content when you bring their sign here. This therefore will be a sign to 637 Saqloq'oj. The root of this word is saq (white, clear, bright, clean, pure, light), something like the English word “fair,” which does not necessarily refer to skin complexion. 638 Kixb'ek ix qa mi'al ojich'aja' ri k'ul (go our daughters to wash the clothes). In a literal sense, the daughters are told to physically wash clothes at the river. In Quiché, however, ch'aj (wash) is also used to describe menstruation (Ajpacaja et al. 1996, 61) and childbirth (Coto) indicating that these women are of child-bearing age and thus available for marriage. 639 Chok is “to invite, offer, entice.” our hearts that they have come unto you.” Thus said the lords when they instructed the maidens. These, then, were the names of the two: Lady Lust640 and Lady Weeping.641 There were two of them.642 Lady Lust and Lady Weeping were their names. These were sent there to the river, to the Bath of Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz. This was the plan of all of these nations. THE SEDUCTION OF LADY LUST AND LADY WAILING643 THEN they went. They were adorned in finery, and truly they appeared beautiful when they went there to the place where Tohil bathes. They carried their wash644 on their 640 Xtaj. X-is the prefix indicating “female,” or a diminutive such as “little.” Taj is “sexual desire, lust, or promiscuity.” 641 Xpuch'. In Quiché, Puch' is “weeping from illness or pain rather than sadness.” Tedlock suggests that this maiden is a Precolumbian precursor of the Llorona (Spanish: Weeper/Wailer), tales of which are told throughout Mesoamerica (D. Tedlock 1996, 310-311). In most versions of this tradition, the Llorona is the spirit of a wronged woman who seeks vengeance by searching in the night for children to murder or steal away. Akkeren suggests, however that the name is more likely derived from Kekchi or Poqom, languages spoken by the ancient Amaq' (Nations) lords. In these languages, puch is “washing clothes,” with the connotation of “menstruating,” meaning the girl is marriageable (Akkeren 2000, 103-105). This reading is fully consistent with the episode described here in which the maidens go to the River of Tohil to wash clothes. 642 The Título Totonicapán also includes this episode in its account of Quiché history, however, it lists three maidens corresponding to the three deities who were to be enticed (Chonay and Goetz 1953, 174-175; Carmack and Mondloch 1983, 87-95, 179-181). The name of the third maiden in that version is K'ib'atz'un Ja. The most likely derivation of this name is from the verb b'atz', which is to “tie up, wind, make thread.” It is also a euphemism, however, for a woman prostituting herself (Coto). Akkeren prefers to read this as a lineage name, B'atz' being the ruling lineage at Chichen, the principal center of the Alta Verapaz region during this period which was one of the centers of power for the Amaq' (Nations) lords (Akkeren 2000, 101-105). 643 lines 6700-6775 644 Ch'ajo'n may have a double meaning here. In its literal sense, it means “wash, laundry.” In a metaphoric sense it also refers to a young woman of child-bearing, and thus marriageable, age (Akkeren 2000, 134), as well as menstruation (Coto). heads as they went. Thus the lords rejoiced because of their two daughters that they had sent there. And when they arrived at the river, they began to wash. Each of them undressed herself and got down on her hands and knees before the stones. Then Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz came together. They arrived there on the bank of the river. But they paid little attention645 to the two maidens that were washing. Straightaway therefore the maidens were ashamed when Tohil arrived. Tohil did not desire the two maidens.646 Then they inquired: “Where do you come from?” they asked the two maidens. “What do you want by coming here to the bank of our river?” they were asked. “We were sent here by the lords, therefore we came. ‘Go to see the faces of Tohil and speak with them,’ the lords said to us. ‘Thus may you receive a sign that you truly saw their faces,’ we were told.” This is what the two maidens said when they explained their mission. This, then, had been the desire of the nations—that the maidens be violated647 by the spirit essence 645 Literally “only a little they passed by their faces.” 646 “Not therefore went their desire to the two maidens.” The “they” of this passage makes it clear that all three of the gods spurned the advances of the maidens, and not just Tohil. This is one of several instances in the text where the authors refer to Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz collectively as Tohil. Note that two paragraphs later the maidens state that their fathers told them to go to see “the faces” of Tohil. This may be of theological significance, in that the three gods are to be considered as one god. Or it may simply be a shorthand way of referring to all three. The latter interpretation is supported by the tendency of the authors in some cases to name only Balam Quitze (or Balam Quitze and Balam Acab) when referring to all four progenitors—Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam (see pp. 213-214, 216, 251; lines 5461-5462, 5492-5493, 5624-5625, 7147-7148). 647 Jox (to have sex, violate, disgrace). In both colonial dictionaries and contemporary Quiché usage, illicit sex is subject to strict social constraints. The most common way today of referring to sex is simply .b'an mak (to do sin), and the meaning is clear without further explanation. It is not known if this was also a characteristic of Precolumbian society, although the context of this episode would indicate that the daughters were being forced to do something beyond the bounds of propriety. In addition, the nations hoped that they could defeat the gods by enticing them into an act that would destroy their power in some of Tohil. Thus said Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz when they spoke to Lady Lust and Lady Weeping (the names of the two maidens): “It is good that you should take the sign of our word with you. You shall wait for it and give it to the lords,” they were told. Thus they counseled with the bloodletters and sacrificers. They spoke with Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam: “Paint648 three robes,649 writing upon them your essence.650 They shall be taken to the nations by means of the two maidens who are washing. Give these to them,” Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, and Mahucutah were told. way. In contemporary Aztec society, violations of sexual morality bore heavy penalties including death. The severity of such violations may be seen in this series of admonitions given to a young Aztec girl by her father: Look now at something else which I want to impress on you, communicate to you, my human creation, my little daughter. Do not permit the lords from whom you are born to be mocked. Do not throw dust or rubbish on them; do not cast any uncleanness on their history, on their black and red ink [writings], on their fame. Do not insult them in any way, such as wanting things of this earth, such as seeking to enjoy them out of season, those which are called sexual things. And if you do not withdraw from them, can you ever come near the gods? Better that you should perish immediately (León-Portilla 1969, 139). 648 Tz'ib'aj. In ancient Quiché, this refers to both writing and painting. This is logical since both were generally done with a paintbrush. In addition, however, the act of writing a word (tz'ib') also metaphorically brings the thing referred to into material existence. Thus a written word, in this case a painted hieroglyph, is not conceptually different from a visual image of the thing, or even the thing itself. This will become apparent when the painted images on the robes come to life and defeat the lords of the enemy nations. This is much the same as the actions of the gods who brought the earth into existence simply by expressing the word “earth” (p. 71; lines 219-228). 649 K'ul (covering). It is difficult to know precisely what type of clothing this might have been in Precolumbian times. Basseta refers to it as a manta, a shawl or a blanket worn wrapped around the body like a cloak or robe.   650 K'oje'ik (existence, nature, essence, being). THE NATIONS ARE DEFEATED BY THE PAINTED ROBES651 THUS the three652 of them painted. First, Balam Quitze painted the image of what came to be a jaguar. He painted it on the face of the robe. Next Balam Acab painted the image of an eagle. Then Mahucutah painted hornets all over it. Everywhere he painted the images of wasps on the face of the robe. Thus the three of them finished their paintings. Three forms they painted on the robes and gave them to Lady Lust and Lady Weeping, as they are called. Then said Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, and Mahucutah: “This is the sign of your word. You shall go before the faces of the lords and say: ‘Truly Tohil spoke to us,’ you shall say. ‘This, then, is the sign we have brought,’ you shall say to them. Then they will wear the robes that you will give to them.” In this way were the maidens instructed. So then they returned, carrying the painted robes. And when they arrived, straightaway the lords rejoiced when they saw their faces and that which was draped across their arms. Thus the maidens were entreated: “Did you not see the face of Tohil?” they were asked. “We did see him,” replied Lady Lust and Lady Weeping. “Very well then. Where is the sign that you have brought? Is it not true?” the lords asked. 651 lines 6776-6919 652 Only Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, and Mahucutah are involved in this episode. Iqui Balam does not participate, likely because he did not have a patron deity or a posterity that survived. For the lords felt it was the sign of their disgrace. Thus the maidens untied the painted robes. Everywhere there were jaguars, everywhere eagles, and everywhere hornets and wasps. The paintings inside the robes shone brightly. Thus they desired the faces of the robes and put them on about them. The image of the jaguar did nothing at first around the lord. Then another lord put on the second painted robe with the image of the eagle. The lord felt good inside it. He turned about before them. He opened up his robe653 before them all. Then another lord put on the third painted robe with the hornets and wasps inside. And when he put it around him he was stung by the hornets and wasps. He could not bear it; he could not endure the stinging insects. Thus he cried out because of the painted images of the insects within the robe. This was the painting of Mahucutah, the third of the paintings. And thus they were defeated. Then the lords rebuked the maidens, they who were named Lady Lust and Lady Weeping: “What are these robes that you have brought here? Where did you go to get them? You are deceivers.” Thus the maidens were asked when they were rebuked. 653 Literally “he disrobes his covering before their faces all of them.” This may mean that he took off his own clothes publicly to put on the new robe. More likely he wrapped the new robe around him with the painted images inside, which he then opened up to display to the other lords present. If the third lord did the same, then the insects that came to life would be in close contact with his skin. Often times the Maya kept powerful tokens or images hidden in bundles or under clothing. The highland Maya today believe that inappropriate display of such objects is extremely dangerous. Thus in the town of Santiago Atitlán, a bundle of very old garments painted with designs reminiscent of animal pelts, which they call Martín, is kept hidden in a carved wooden chest except at rare times when it is taken out for display. The bundle itself is unwrapped only once a year, on November 11, by a special priest called the nab'eysil. The nab'eysil opens the bundle at midnight with all the electric lights turned off, and with the doors and windows closed and locked. He then wears the garments as he dances in a circular pattern around the inside of the darkened room by candlelight. He does this with his arms slightly apart to display the garment. Participants believe that if the bundle were opened with the windows or doors opened, wind would rush out and devastate the world (Mendelson 1965, 57; Christenson 2001, 162). Thus all of the nations were defeated by Tohil. They had desired that Tohil would get gratification from Lady Lust and Lady Weeping. But these, then, became seductresses.654 They came to be temptations to the heart of the nations. Thus the nations did not achieve the defeat of the enchanted people—Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, and Mahucutah. Then all the nations considered again: “How can we do it? Truly great their natures have come to be,” they said. Then they gathered their thoughts: “We shall merely pursue them and kill them. We shall arm655 ourselves with arrows and with shields. Are we not many? There shall not be even one or two left of them,” they said when they gathered their thoughts. Thus all the nations armed themselves. They were crowded with killers when all the nations gathered. They were killers. Now Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam were on the top of the mountain Hacavitz. This was the name of the mountain where they were. Thus their sons were established on the top of the mountain. They were not many then. They were certainly not as numerous at first as the people from the nations. They occupied only a small part of the mountain top. Thus the nations plotted to kill them. They all gathered together. They arrived, all of them having been summoned. 654 Joxol ch'ek (scratchers knee). This is a play on words, a particularly prevalent Maya practice when referring to sexual things as a way of speaking about it indirectly. Jox is “to have sex,” and also “to hoe or to scratch.” A woman “knee scratcher” is a fornicator, prostitute, or one who wishes to seduce someone to have sex. The more common expression today is “leg burner” which also means seductress. 655 Literally “adorn.” THE NATIONS ARE HUMILIATED656 THUS all the nations gathered together. They were all armed with arrows and shields. Their precious metal adornments were innumerable. All of the lords and warriors were beautiful in their appearance. But in fact they were mere boasters,657 all of them. Truly they would all come to be enslaved.658 “This Tohil, he is a god. We also shall worship him. But we shall capture659 him,” they said among themselves. But Tohil learned of it, and so too did Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, and Mahucutah. They heard what was being planned. They did not sleep, nor did they rest. Thus all the warriors had adorned themselves. They rose up in the night with confidence in their hearts.660 But although they went out, they did not reach their destination. All the warriors merely slept in the road. Then was their defeat by Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, and Mahucutah. They merely slept in the road, completely senseless. All of them were exhausted with sleep. Then they began to have their eyebrows plucked,661 along with their whiskers.662 The precious metal was untied from 656 lines 6920-7075 657 B'anoj tzij (making words). These are liars, boasters, people that are “just talk, not doers.” 658 Alab'il. This is literally “stepsons, godsons.” It is also used to refer to war captives and slaves. In ancient Aztec warfare, once a captive had been taken in war, the victor seized his opponent by the hair and addressed him as “my beloved son,” indicating that the captive was subject to him with the loyalty due a father. 659 Kanab'ij is to capture, and also to make use of something. 660 Xkokib'ej chi ki k'ux (they believed in their hearts). 661 U mich'ik ki muquwach rumal (its plucking their eyebrows by them). This phrase has a double meaning. On one level, “plucking” is a metaphor for tricking or deceiving someone. In a material sense, to pluck out facial hair is to show shame, contempt, disdain, or scorn. their clothing, as well as from their headdresses and their necklaces. The precious metal was taken from the necks of their staffs. This was a punishment upon their faces, and a plucking as well. This was done as a sign of the greatness of the Quiché people. And when they arose, straightaway they reached for their headdresses and the necks of their staffs. But now there was no precious metal on the necks of their staffs, nor on their headdresses. “Who has taken us?663 By whom were we plucked? Where did they who stole our precious metal come from?” all the warriors asked. “Perhaps it was those deceivers664 that abduct people. But they will not succeed in frightening us. Surely we shall invade their citadel. We shall see again the face of our precious metal and once more make it ours,” said all the nations. But this was merely boasting. Thus the hearts of the bloodletters and sacrificers were comforted on the top of the mountain. Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam merely exercised their wisdom. Then Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam considered. They made a palisade around the edge of their citadel. They placed wooden planks and pointed stakes about their citadel. Then they made effigies that looked just like people. They arranged these on top of the palisade, arming them with shields and with arrows. They placed headdresses with precious metal on their heads. They adorned these effigies of 662 Kismachi' (their whiskers). The Quiché language has only one word for facial hair, and thus does not distinguish between beards and moustaches. 663 This is a common Quiché expression, similar to the English “we’ve been taken” or “we’ve been had.” This parallels the following phrase, “by whom were we plucked?” which is an expression for “who deceived us?” 664 K'axtok' (demons, deceivers). mere carved wood with the precious metal of the nations that they had taken on the road. With these they encircled the citadel. Then also they entreated Tohil with their thoughts: “What if we should die? What if we are defeated?” they asked. Thus their hearts wept before the face of Tohil. “Do not mourn. I am. You shall use these against them. Do not fear.” Thus he spoke to Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam. And they were given the hornets and wasps. So they went out to gather them, and they returned bearing them. And these they placed inside four great gourds, which they positioned in four places around the edge of the citadel. The hornets and wasps were closed up within the great gourds. They used these as weapons against the nations. The citadel was being spied upon, watched in ambush, scrutinized as a target by the messengers of the nations. “There are not so many,” they said. And then they saw the effigies of carved wood which were motionless, carrying their arrows and their shields. They appeared to be true people. Like killers they appeared to be when the nations saw them. All the nations rejoiced then, for they did not see many of them. But there were crowds of people from the nations. Their people had countless warriors, killers, and murderers that had come against Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, and Mahucutah, who were on top of the mountain named Hacavitz. We shall now speak of this invasion. THE NATIONS ARE DEFEATED665 THERE they were, Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam, united on top of the mountain with their wives and their children. Then came the warriors and the killers. There were not merely sixteen thousand or twenty-four thousand666 from the nations that encircled the citadel. They yelled, armed with their arrows and shields. They would cry out, clamoring, hustling about, shouting their mockery, and whistling. But the bloodletters and sacrificers went inside beneath their citadel, fearing nothing. They merely looked to the palisade at the edge of their citadel as they gathered together with their wives and their children. Thus they were reassured,667 and the words of the nations were sweet to them. Then the warriors ascended a little way up the face of the mountain. But it was only a little way, for they did not reach the entrance to the citadel. And then they opened the four gourds that were in the citadel, and out flew the hornets and the wasps. They were like clouds of smoke when they came out of each of the gourds. The warriors were thus finished off because of the insects. They landed on their eyes and on their noses; on their mouths, on their legs, and on their arms. Wherever they were, the hornets and wasps went to catch them. Wherever they were, these went to swarm around them. Everwhere there were hornets and wasps. They would swarm around them stinging their eyes. There were great numbers of insects around each of the people. 665 lines 7076-7206 666 Ka chuy, ox chuy (two eight thousands, three eight thousands). 667 Ku'l ki k'ux (seated their hearts). This is “to be reassured, confident, or have faith in something.” Thus they became disoriented668 because of the hornets and the wasps. Neither could they now grasp their arrows or their shields. They hunched over with their faces to their knees on the surface of the ground. They were scattered. They fell senseless before the face of the mountain. Then they were struck with arrows and chopped with axes, although they were only pieces of dry wood that Balam Quitze and Balam Acab used on them.669 Their wives also came upon them as killers. Thus only a portion of them were able to return. Only a few people from the nations were able to escape. At first they tried to flee, but when they were caught they were finished off. They were killed. And it was not just a few of the people who died. And of those that did not die, the insects came upon them and tormented their hearts. They were no longer able to wage war. They did not take up their arrows or their shields again. Thus all the nations were humiliated and begged humbly before the faces of Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, and Mahucutah: “Pity us. Do not kill us,” they said. “Very well then. Certainly you shall become obedient.670 You shall be servants671 as long as there is sun and light,” they were told. Thus was the defeat of all the nations because of our first mothers and our first fathers. It was done on the top of the mountain Hacavitz, as it is called today. This was 668 Q'ab'arik. In current Quiché usage this is “to be drunk, enebriated.” According to Basseta, however, it may also mean “to be disoriented, or to faint.” 669 The authors wish to emphasize that the victory was purely a matter of divine intervention, without need for conventional arms. Thus the pieces of wood acted as if they were arrows or axes. 670 Kame'l (humble, obedient). This is a play on words since kamel is “one who dies.” Thus the captives are saying that rather than be dead, they are to be humble and obedient. 671 Aj patan (he/she of the pack strap) is a servant, or more specifically a bearer. Patan is both the pack strap worn by men around the forehead to carry loads, as well as metaphorically any task or errand. In a larger sense, the term may be used to describe someone who is subsidiary such as a vassal or tribute payer. the beginning. There they multiplied and became many. They had daughters and they had sons on top of Hacavitz. They rejoiced then, for they had defeated all the nations there on top of the mountain. Thus they had done this. They had surely defeated the nations, indeed all the nations. Thus their hearts were reassured. They spoke to their sons as the time approached when they would die. For they truly desired to die. Now we shall tell of this also, of the deaths of they who are called Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam. THE DEATHS OF THE FOUR PROGENITORS672 THEY sensed their impending death and disappearance.673 Thus they gave instructions to their sons. They were not ill, nor did they groan from sickness, nor did they breathe with difficulty. Yet they left behind their word with their sons. These, then, are the names of the sons: Balam Quitze had two sons. Co Caib674 was the name of the firstborn, and Co Cavib675 was the name of the secondborn. These were the sons of Balam Quitze, the grandfather and father of the Cavecs. 672 lines 7207-7360 673 Literally “loss.” 674 K'o Kaib' (Lord Two). K'o is an irregular verb construction meaning “there is, or he/she/it possesses.” However when used as a title it suggests “nobility, lordship, or authority.” Thus Coto lists Qo ch'u vi (there is on his head, or above) as “to be charged, or have jurisdiction/authority”; Qo r'a (there is breath) as “to have authority”; or Qo u eij (there is his day) as “to have authority, great thing, famous or glorious.” Kaib' is simply the number two. Thus this name would be something like “Lord or Sir Two.” When used as a verb, kaib'aj is “to multiply or divide.” The name may refer to the fact that he had a large posterity, or that his was a significant division of the lineage. Alternatively, the “Two” may simply mean that he represents the second generation of lords (Akkeren 2000, 53). 675 K'o Kawib' (Lord Adornment). Balam Acab of the Nihaibs also had two sons. Co Acul was the name of his first son, and Co Acutec was the name of his second son. Mahucutah had only one son, whose name was Co Ahau.676 These three had sons, but Iqui Balam had no sons. These, then, were the names of their sons, who were true bloodletters and sacrificers. The four of them were united as they sang of the pain in their hearts. Their hearts wept within their song. Our Burial was the name of the song that they sang. And these were the instructions that they gave to their sons: “You, our sons, we shall go but we shall also return again. Words of light677 and counsels of light678 we give to you.” And then they spoke to their wives: “You have come here from a far away mountain, you, our wives,” they said. Then they were counseled: “We go to our people.679 Our Lord Deer is now established,680 mirrored in the sky. We shall thus return, for our work is accomplished, and our day is now finished. 676 K'o Ajaw (Lord/Sir Lord). 677 Saqil tzij (light word). 678 Saqil pixab' (light instructions, counsel, law). 679 Qamaq' (our people, tribe, nation). 680 Cholan is to “be ordered, aligned, established, placed, or declared.” Thus “Our Lord Deer,” one of the titles for their patron god Tohil (see pp. 234-235; lines 6343-6352), had achieved a permanent, fixed position. From the following phrase, this appears to have been symbolized by some astronomical phenomenon. There appear to be deer constellation references in both the Dresden and Madrid codices. Gabrielle Vail associates the deer-trapping sections of the Madrid Codex as having astronomical associations, identifying the deer constellation as Virgo (Bricker and Vail 1997, 99-107). Remember us.681 Do not forget us.682 Do not sweep us away. You shall surely see your homes and your mountains where you will settle. Thus let it be so. Go therefore, go to see the place from whence we came.” This was the counsel they were given. Then they left behind the sign of the existence of Balam Quitze: “This is the token of my memory that I shall leave with you. This is your glory. These are my instructions, the result of what I have pondered,” he said when he left behind the sign of his existence. Bundled Glory,683 it was called. Its contents were not clear for it was truly bundled. They did not unwrap it, nor was its stitching clear. No one had seen it when it was bundled. This, then, was their counsel when they disappeared there atop the mountain Hacavitz. They were not buried by their wives, nor their children. Neither was their 681 Kojina'. Literally “sense/feel us.” This is stronger in the Quiché language than to merely have memories of someone. To an extent, traditionalist Maya do not consider powerful individuals of the past to be dead. Nicolás Chávez Sojuel, a sculptor in the community of Santiago Atitlán, carved an image of Diego Kihu, a powerful nab'eysil (priest) who died in the 1970s, on a panel of the central altarpiece in the church. In this panel, Kihu is walking at the head of his own funeral cortège. When I asked how this was possible, Nicolás said that he hadn’t really died. He then related the following story: “Diego Kihu... could work many miracles. He had the face of a saint’s image. He had power over water and rain. He could make it rain whenever he wished, and yet when he walked in the rain he never got wet.... He was very old when he died, about 128. But he didn’t die of illness, he just decided to leave because he wanted to be with the other nab'eysils in Paq'alib'al [a cave located southwest of the community where the saints and deified ancestors live]. He told people that he would leave at 6:00 pm on a Wednesday and said goodbye to everyone and gave them his blessing. Everyone placed candles around his bed and he left right at 6:00, as he had said. That evening he visited many people in dreams and told them not to worry about him because he was in Paq'alib'al. When he was buried a great wind and earthquake passed through the cemetery to prove that he was not dead” (Christenson 2001, 211). The highland Maya frequently tell stories about visitations from ancestors who continue to work on behalf of their community whenever necessary. Recently I gave an old photograph, depicting a group of elders from Santiago Atitlán taken in the late nineteenth century, to a friend of mine who is the son of a prominent elder in that community. He immediately named a number of the individuals in the photograph. When I asked how he knew them, considering that they had died long before he was born, he replied: “We all know them. They still visit us in dreams and in person. We know their faces. They are still very powerful—the soul of the town. Their minds and their souls are white [saq: white, light, pure, clear, clean]. This is our heritage. These people are still alive because I live. I carry their blood. I remember. They are not forgotten.” 682 Literally “do not lose us.” 683 Pisom Q'aq'al. Q'aq'al is derived from the root, q'aq' (flame). In this form, it refers to “power, glory, splendor.” disappearance clear when they vanished. But their counsel was clear. Thus the Bundle came to be precious to them as a memorial to their father. Straightaway they burned offerings before it as a memorial to their father. Thus the people were established by the lords following this beginning by Balam Quitze, the grandfather and father of the Cavecs. His sons, named Co Caib and Co Cavib, were not lost. Thus were the deaths of our four grandfathers and fathers when they disappeared, when they left their sons there on top of the mountain Hacavitz. These sons tarried there. But the day of all the nations had fallen, and they were humiliated and lacking in power. The people had become numerous by then, and all of them gathered together each day to remember their father. The Bundle was precious684 to them. They did not open it. It remained bundled. Bundled Glory they called it when it existed. They also named it their Wrapping. It had been left behind by their fathers as the true sign of their existence. Thus was the disappearance and end of Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam, the first people who came from across the sea in the East. Anciently they came here. They died in their old age, they who were called bloodletters and sacrificers. THE SONS OF THE PROGENITORS JOURNEY TO TULAN685 THEN they remembered in their hearts the journey they were to make there to the East. They remembered the instructions given by their fathers who had died long ago. 684 Literally “great its day.” 685 lines 7361-7411 The nations had since given wives to them, thus becoming their fathers-in-law. Thus the three of them had married women. And they said when they left: “We go to the East from where our fathers came.” Thus said the three sons when they began their journey.686 Co Caib was the name of the first, the son of Balam Quitze of the Cavecs. Co Acutec was the name of the son of Balam Acab of the Nihaibs. Co Ahau was the name of the other, the son of Mahucutah of the Ahau Quichés. These, then, were the names of the three who went across the sea. They had wisdom and knowledge. They were more than ordinary people in their nature. They left behind their counsel to all their older brothers, and their younger brothers. They rejoiced when they left: “We will not die. We will return,” they said when the three of them left. Thus they passed over the sea, arriving there in the East. They went there to receive their lordship. This, then, is the name of the lord, the lord of the East, when they arrived: THE SONS RECEIVE AUTHORITY TO RULE687 THEN they arrived before the face of the lord, whose name was Nacxit.688 He was the only judge689 over a great dominion.690 He then gave to them the signs and symbols of 686 Literally “took their road.” 687 lines 7412-7450 688 Nacxit is derived from the Nahua words nawi (four) and ikxit (foot) (Campbell 1983, 84), perhaps referring to the extent of his power to the four cardinal directions of the earth. This is also one of the titles for the feathered serpent deity known as Kukulcan in the Maya lowlands and as Quetzalcoatl in Central Mexico (Recinos 1950, 207 n. 3; Roys 1967, 83; Edmonson 1982, 16 n. 220; Nicholson 2001, 228). It is their lordship. Thus they received the signs of office for the Ah Pop,691 and the Ah Pop of the Reception House.692 They received the signs of their glory and lordship that pertained to the offices of Ah Pop and Ah Pop of the Reception House. These, then, are the names of the tokens of their glory and lordship: Canopy693 and throne, Bone flute694 and drum,695 likely that Nacxit was a ruler from some major political center in the general direction east from the Maya highlands. Nacxit was apparently one of the titles used by Maya rulers at both Chichen Itza and Mayapan, indicating their attempts to claim Central Mexican authority as an important component of their own right to rule (Nicholson 2001, 228-229). 689 Q'atol tzij. Literally “guardian/cutter of the word.” 690 Ajawarem is “lordship or sovereignty” when referring to the power of the office, and “dominion or domain” when referring to the physical extent of a lord’s territory and its people. 691 Aj Pop (He of the Mat). This is the highest office within the ruling Nima Quiché lineage. The office belonged to the line founded by Co Caib, son of Balam Quitze of the Cavecs. The ancient lords of the Maya sat on mat thrones, and these became symbolic of lordship and authority itself. The mat represented the power not only of the ruler, but also of his subjects. In this sense, the interlaced reeds of the mat represented the members of the community, linked in a common purpose. Thus Ximénez translated popol as “community.” This office might then be translated “he of the community” or “master of the community.” Coto lists various offices, all of which held the title of ah pop: “constable, chief, counselor, dignitary, and lord.” None of these European titles, however, is equivalent with the Maya concept of the office. “He of the Mat” is misleading without extensive elaboration of the meaning of “mat.” I have chosen therefore to leave the title untranslated. 692 Aj Pop K'am Ja (He of the Mat Reception House). This is the second highest office among the Nima Quichés, serving as an advisor and representative of the Ah Pop. The title was held by representatives of the secondary line founded by Co Nache, the illegitimate son of Co Caib’s wife by Co Cavib (Carmack and Mondloch 1983, 181-182). The “reception house” may refer to a building or hall used for receiving petitioners, visiting dignitaries, or perhaps tribute. The latter possibility is supported by Colonial dictionaries that list k'amajal as “to send or pay tribute” (Varea). The importance of tribute collection as the focus of high office may be seen in Las Casas’ description of Pre-Conquest Quiché administration: “That supreme king had certain principal men of counsel who had charge of justice and determined what should be done in all business affairs. It is said today by the Indians who saw it, that they were like the Oidores of Guatimala in the Royal Audience. They saw the tribute which was collected from the kingdom and they divided and sent to the king what was needed for the support of his person and for his estate” (Las Casas 1967, III.ccxxxiv.500. Translation by author). Alternatively, Akkeren reads the word as k'amaja (almost, close) in the sense that he holds a position just below the Ah Pop. The title would thus be something like “Vice Ah Pop” (Akkeren 2000, 213). 693 Muj is a “canopy, mantle, throne, or cushion of a throne or seat” (Coto). Muj is literally “shadow” and likely refers to the shadow cast by the canopy. Alonso de Zorita noted that prior to the Spanish conquest, the Quichés had “three lords” who were distinguished by the number of canopies they had: “The principal lord had three canopies or mantles adorned with fine featherwork over his seat, the second had two, and the third one” (Zorita 1963, 272). Shining Black Powder696 and Yellow Stone,697 Puma Paws and Jaguar Paws, Head and Hooves of the Deer,698 Arm Band699 and Snailshell Rattle, Tobacco Gourd700 and Food Bowl,701 Macaw Feathers and Snowy Egret Feathers.702 All these they brought when they returned. They also brought the writings703 of Tulan from the other side of the sea. These were the writings, as they were called, that contained the many things with which they had been invested.704 694 Coto identifies this as a small bone flute used in dances. 695 The standard musical instruments used in ritual processions and ceremonies are the flute and large drum. Each is considered a living entity. Among the modern highland Maya, the drum often has a hole, or cluster of holes, in its side called its “mouth.” Attendants periodically pour liquor into this hole to give the drum strength when it gets “thirsty.” 696 Basseta identifies tatil (a variant of titil), as a shining black powder or saltpetre used to dry ink when writing. Ximénez interprets titil as an “unguent with which they [Quichés] paint/smear” (Ximénez 1985, 536). In this context, it, along with the “yellow stone” that is paired with it, were likely pigments used as face or body paint connected with ceremonial performances. 697 Coto identifies ean abah (yellow stone) as face paint. 698 Deerskins were the symbol of Tohil, the patron deity of the Quichés. They are still kept in many highland Maya communities as tokens of deities and worn in dances (see footnote 620). 699 Makutax from the Nahua macuetlaxtli (mah—hand, arm; cuetlax—leather) (Campbell 1983, 84; cf. Edmonson 1971, 218; D. Tedlock 1996, 316 n. 179). Because it is paired with a musical instrument, this perhaps has dangles that make sounds when danced. 700 K'us B'us (Tobacco Gourd). This is likely derived from a combination of the lowland Maya word for tobacco (k'utz), and a small wild gourd used to hold ground tobacco (b'ux). Tobacco plays a major role in Maya ceremonies, both ancient and modern. Deities, rulers, and priests are often depicted wearing a tobacco pouch in Precolumbian art. 701 Tedlock identifies kaxkon with the Nahua caxcomulli (bowl for eating) (D. Tedlock 1996, 316 n. 179). 702 Astapulul is likely the great heron or snowy egret, a word derived from the Nahua aztapololli (aztatl—great heron or snowy egret; and pol—great, large) (Campbell 1983, 84; cf. Recinos 1950, 209 n. 5; D. Tedlock 1996, 316 n. 179). THE MIGRATIONS OF THE QUICHÉS705 And when they arrived there atop their citadel called Hacavitz, they gathered all the Tamub and Ilocab together. All the nations rejoiced when Co Caib,706 Co Acutec, and Co Ahau arrived. These alone received the lordship of the nations. The Rabinals, the Cakchiquels, and the Ah Tziquinahas rejoiced when the sign of the greatness of their lordship was revealed to them. Great then would become the essence of the nations. For their lordship was not truly complete when they were at Hacavitz. When they were on top of the mountain the only people there were those who had come from the East. But now there were many of them. By then the wives of Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, and Mahucutah had died. Then they left, they abandoned their mountain and searched for another mountain to settle. They settled innumerable mountains, giving each of them honorific epithets and 703 Tz'ib'al is both “writings and paintings.” These were likely painted codices. Alonso de Zorita visited Utatlan soon after the Conquest and was shown certain “paintings that they had which recorded their history for more than eight hundred years back, and which were interpreted for me by very ancient Indians” (Zorita 1963, 272). 704 These paintings and tokens of lordship gave the Quichés their sanction to rule, received from the hand of a “Toltec” lord who had the proper authority. The painted texts were likely a record of this sanction, prepared at the court of Nacxit to be used as proof of the lords’ newly-acquired legitimacy as rulers. 705 lines 7451-7550 706 According to the Título Totonicapán, the Quiché lords sent both of the sons of Balam Quitze on this mission. Co Caib traveled East, and his brother Co Cavib went West. Co Caib was successful in bringing back the tokens of authority whereas Co Cavib returned without accomplishing his purpose (Carmack and Mondloch 1983, 181). Upon his return, Co Cavib fell into further disgrace: “Then (C’ok’awib) demonstrated his weakness and fornicated with his sister in law, the wife of C’ocaib. Balam C’ok’awib engendered a son and the child was still in the cradle when it was told to C’ocaib” (Ibid.). It is this same Co Nache who succeeded his father (see p. 262; line 7557) and founded the title of Ah Popol (see p. 293; line 8520). Perhaps because of his illegitimacy, the Título Totonicapán suggests that he should have held the secondary office of Ah Pop K'amja (Ah Pop of the Reception House)j, which is, indeed, the office held by his descendents beginning with Iztayul (Carmack and Mondloch 1983, 182). Co Caib’s legitimate son Xmayquej apparently succeeded to the higher office of Ah Pop (Carmack 1981, 129-130). names. Our first mothers and fathers gathered together and became strong, according to what the ancient people say. Thus they abandoned their first citadel, called Hacavitz. Thus they arrived, they founded a new citadel called Chi Quix.707 Here they spent a great deal of time atop this unified citadel group. They had daughters and sons when they were there. Although they were on four mountains, there was only one name for the entire citadel. They gave away their daughters in marriage to their sons. They gave away their daughters merely as an act of compassion, as gifts without payment in return. They did only that which was good. Then they passed through each division of the citadel. These were the names of the mountains of Chi Quix where they tarried: Chi Chac,708 Humetaha,709 Culba,710 and Cavinal.711 707 Chi K'ix (Thorny Place). Akkeren places this site at the confluence of the Chixoy River and the Calá River where it is known today as Chi Cruz (Akkeren 2000, 94, 107-108). 708 Chi Chak (Wound/Thorn Place). 709 Jumeta Ja (Bark House). According to the Título Totonicapán, the Quichés settled this area briefly after they had abandoned Hacavitz: “They arrived at the place they called Chi-Humet, because there was an abundance of limestone and because they built their dwellings of it. They found some plantains and little birds. Nevertheless, they suffered many hardships in those mountains” (Chonay and Goetz 1953, 182; Carmack 1973, 290-291). 710 K'ulb'a (Landmark), based on k'ulb'at (Basseta). In the Título Totonicapán, this site is referred to as Culba-Cavinal, indicating that they are closely-related sites. 711 Kawinal (Armory), based on cawij, “to arm, adorn, prepare, embellish” (Basseta). The Late Postclassic site of Kawinal is located on the Ka'ala (Calá) River two kilometers north of where it empties into the Chixoy River (Akkeren, personal communication). The mountain above this site is still called Cerro Cauinal (Fox 1978, 249). It is likely that Chi Quix, Chi Chac, Humetaha and Culuba were located nearby, although their precise location is unknown (Recinos 1950, 211 n. 9). The Título Totonicapán and the Título C'oyoi list Humeta and Culba-Cavinal as places of refuge for the Quichés following their abandonment of Hacavitz. (Chonay and Goetz 1953, 182-183; Carmack 1973, 289). The Quichés allied themselves to the local Aq'ab' inhabitants here, although it must have been an unequal relationship since they received tribute from them (Carmack 1973, 289-291). Then they investigated the mountains near their citadel. They looked for a mountain on which to dwell, for they had become numerous. They who had received lordship in the East were now dead. They who had come to the peaks of each citadel had become aged grandfathers. But they were not content.712 They passed through numerous afflictions and misfortunes until at last they discovered the citadel of the grandfathers and the fathers. This therefore was the name of the citadel that they came to: THE FOUNDATION OF CHI IZMACHI713 CHI IZMACHI,714 then, was the name of the mountain on which they dwelt as their citadel. There they settled and tested their glory. They ground their lime plaster and their whitewash715 in the fourth generation of lords. It is said that Co Nache716 and Beleheb Queh717 ruled then, along with the Lord Magistrate.718 712 Literally “they did not receive their faces,” which is “to settle down, be content, or become comfortable.” 713 lines 7550-7707 714 Chi Ismachi' (Place of Whiskers). The ruins of this settlement are located on a hill just across a small canyon southwest of the later Quiché capital of Cumarcah, occupied at the time of the Spanish conquest. According to the Título Tamub (Historia Quiché de Don Juan de Torres), the founding of this citadel marked the beginning of the true ajawarem (lordship) of the Quichés (Recinos 1957, 43-45), likely reinforced by the presence there of the tokens of office brought from Tulan by Co Caib. All three major lineages of the Quichés (Nima Quichés, Tamub, and Ilocab) occupied Chi Izmachi. After the Nima Quichés moved on to their eventual capital at Cumarcah, the Tamub were left behind as the sole inhabitants of Chi Izmachi. The disgraced Ilocab occupied the site of Chisalin (also known as Mukwitz Pilocab), located across a small canyon northeast of Cumarcah (Carmack 1981, 234-239). 715 This is the first settlement described as having plastered and whitewashed buildings, characteristic of important Precolumbian centers as opposed to smaller communities built from adobe and wood. 716 K'o Na Che' (Lord House Tree), where na is the Lowland Maya form of the Quiché ja (house). The Maya often refer to trees as metaphors for lineages, the branches (posterity) growing out of the trunk (founder). It was there at Chi Izmachi that Lord Co Tuha719 and Iztayul720 ruled as Ah Pop and Ah Pop of the Reception House. Under them it came to be a very fine citadel. Only three great houses721 were built there at Chi Izmachi, not the twenty-four great houses of today. Yet there were three great houses: Just one great house of the Cavecs; Just one great house over the Nihaibs; And just one of the Ahau Quichés. 717 B'elejeb' Kej (Nine Deer). This is the first occurence in the text of a historical figure whose name is derived from a day on the Highland Maya calendar, a common practice at the time of the Conquest and into the Spanish Colonial period. It is likely the day on which he was born. 718 Q'alel Ajaw. This is another office within the Quiché hierarchy that has no English equivalent. It is the third highest position within the Nima Quiché line (after Ah Pop and Ah Pop of the Reception House). The title is specifically linked with the Nihaib lineage. Neither the Cavec, the Ajau Quichés, nor the Zaquics (the other three lineages within the Nima Quiché alliance) have a Q'alel title. Colonial dictionaries give a variety of descriptive meanings to it including “cacique” (Spanish for a native chief), “generous person, prince” (Coto), or simply an “important person” (Varea). Coto also lists ah ealel as a “constable.” Basseta defines calel achi as a “captain of soldiers.” In modern Quiché, the title is given to judges, and some early dictionaries suggest that this office may have included judicial functions as well. The title is likely something akin to “magistrate” with duties that include peacekeeping and military activity. Ajaw is “lord.” 719 K'o Tuja (Lord Sweatbath). According to other highland Maya documents, the rise of the Nima Quichés under the leadership of Co Tuha aroused the envy of the Ilocab at Chi Izmachi. At first they tried to create tension between Co Tuha and Iztayul, the Ah Pop of the Reception House. When this plan did not succeed, the Ilocab ambushed a group of Quiché lords and warriors as they bathed in a canyon. The Ilocab were eventually defeated and the survivors taken back to Chi Izmachi to be sacrificed, but Co Tuha subsequently disappears from the records and apparently died in the revolt. The records say that this was the beginning of regular human sacrifice at Chi Izmachi which caused all the people of the region to fear them greatly (Carmack and Mondloch 1983, 194). Soon after this incident the old alliance broke up and the Nima Quichés abandoned Chi Izmachi. 720 Campbell suggests that this name is derived from the Nahua ista—white, and yol—heart, giving a reading of “White Heart” (Campbell 1983, 85-86). 721 Nim Ja (Great House) may refer to both a large building or palace, as well as the lineage to which it was dedicated. In this case, the reference is to the lineage, since the three great houses were quartered in only two buildings. This is where administrative and judicial decisions were made for each of the major lineages. The Popol Vuh mentions that the negotiation of bride exchange in particular took place in the great houses. The great houses likely also served as the residences for the lineage heads as well as the repositories for the tokens of authority brought from Tulan. There were only two swollen722 great houses, one each for the two lineage divisions at Chi Izmachi. Their hearts were united. There were no bad feelings or anger, only steadfast723 lordship. There was no contention or disturbance. There was only purity and a tranquil sense of community in their hearts. There was no envy724 or jealousy.725 Yet their glory was still meager. They had not pulled together,726 nor had they become great. They attempted to strengthen their defenses727 there at Chi Izmachi. This act was surely a sign of their sovereignty. It was surely a sign of their glory, as well as their greatness. However this was seen by the Ilocab, who fomented war. They desired that Lord Co Tuha be murdered. They desired that there be but one lord over them. Thus the Ilocab wished to convince Lord Iztayul to murder him. But this plot against Lord Co Tuha did not succeed. Their envy merely fell on their own backs. This first attempt by the Ilocab to kill the lord failed. Yet it was the foundation of strife and the clamor for war. Thus the Ilocab made a first attempt at invading the citadel, coming as killers. It was their desire that the Quichés be destroyed.728 They wished to exercise lordship in 722 Kumatzil. This is “swollen, enlarged, inflated” (Basseta). It likely refers here both to the size of the structures, as well as to the fact that they were overcrowded. 723 Li'anik is “steadfast, flat, tranquil, pacific.” 724 Moxwachinik (left/crazy facing). 725 Q'aq'wachinik (fire facing). 726 The Quiché expression reads kanuk'maijoq (drawn/pulled together). It is an interesting coincidence that this metaphor is similar to our English expression “pull it together,” meaning to get one’s life or affairs in order. 727 Xkikowisaj pokob' (they strengthened shield). Kowisaj is not only “to strengthen,” but specifically “to plaster” (Coto). Thus the Quichés were fortifying their citadel with plastered walls. 728 Literally “the loss of their faces.” their own hearts. But when they came to seize it they were captured and despoiled, and few of them were ever set free again. Then began the sacrifices. The Ilocab were sacrificed before the face of the god as payment for their offenses against Lord Co Tuha. Thus many were taken into captivity and enslaved. They became servants. They merely gave themselves up in defeat as a result of their clamor for war against the lord as well as his canyon-citadel.729 They had desired in their hearts to ruin and mock the lordship of the Quichés. But this was not accomplished. Thus they commenced to sacrifice these people before the face of the god. Then they built their war defenses, and this was the beginning of the fortification of the citadel at Chi Izmachi. Thus they began to lay the foundation of their glory, because the sovereignty of the Quiché lord was surely great. Everywhere there were enchanted lords. None came to humiliate or mock them. They were but workers of greatness. There they put down roots at Chi Izmachi, and there also their bloodletting god increased in greatness. And all the nations, the small and the great, became afraid. They witnessed the arrival of captive people to be sacrificed and killed by the glory and sovereignty of Lord Co Tuha and Lord Iztayul, in alliance with the Nihaib and Ahau Quichés. There were only three divisions of lineages there at the citadel named Chi Izmachi. 729 Siwan tinamit (canyon citadel). These two terms together refer to the fortified hilltop center as well as the surrounding population living in the canyons and valleys where crops were cultivated. Many contemporary Quiché towns are still referred to as siwan-tinamit when referring to the urban center plus its surrounding dependent communities. Bunzel notes that this phrase is always used to refer to the town of Chichicastenango in ritual contexts (Bunzel 1952, 2; Schultze-Jena 1954, 28). And yet again they began to feast and to drink to their daughters. They who were called the Three Great Houses gathered together to celebrate. They would drink their drinks and eat their food, and this alone was the bride price for their sisters and their daughters. There was only joy in their hearts when they feasted within their great houses: “We give only our thanks and our gratitude as a sign of our agreement;730 as a sign of our word regarding the boys and girls born of their mothers,” they said. They gave one another honorific titles, and gave names to their lineages, their seven nations, their fortified cities. “We have intermarried, we the Cavecs, we the Nihaibs, and we the Ahau Quichés,” they said. These three lineages, and these three great houses, dwelt a long time there at Chi Izmachi. But then they looked for and found another citadel. And so they abandoned the peak of Chi Izmachi. THE FOUNDATION OF CUMARCAH731 THUS they rose up again and came to the citadel that the Quichés would call Cumarcah.732 The lord Co Tuha, along with Cucumatz733 and all the lords, came there. 730 Tzijel (word, news, agreement). In this context, tzijel refers to the covenant or agreement reached in marriage negotiations. It also has a double meaning, as tzijel may refer to “sons, descendents, posterity” (Coto). 731 lines 7708-7787 732 Q'umarkaj (Ancient/Rotten Canes/Reeds). The name of this citadel has generally been translated “Place of Rotten Canes” (Recinos 1950, 215, D. Tedlock 1996, 183). Q'umarik, however, also refers to something ancient, while aj can be used for a wide variety of reeds. The more likely translation of the citadel is thus “Place of Ancient Reeds.” This ties the city figuratively with the ancient place of their origin at Tulan (Place of Reeds). Following the Spanish conquest, Cumarcah was renamed Utatlan by the Tlaxcalan allies of the invaders. In the Tlaxcalan dialect of Nahuatl, this name means “among the reeds,” a close translation of the Quiché name (Carmack 1981, 143). Cumarcah was the capital of the Nima Quichés There had been five moves and five generations of people since the beginning of the light, the beginning of the nations, the beginning of life and creation. There they built many homes. They also built houses for the gods at the center, on the highest point of the citadel. Thus they came and began to be great in their lordship. They were many now, crowded together. They planned their great houses. They gathered together. And yet they were also divided because there began to be contention. They began to envy each other regarding the bride price for their sisters and their daughters. For it was no longer merely food and drink that they demanded. This, then, was the root of their division. They turned on each other, desecrating734 the bones and the skulls of the dead. They became infuriated at the time of the Spanish conquest. The ruins of the citadel are located approximately two kilometers west of the modern city of Santa Cruz del Quiché. Little remains of its buildings, partly because it was burned by Pedro de Alvarado during his conquest of the Maya highlands in 1524, and partly because of extensive looting of its stones for buildings elsewhere since that time. Cumarcah was constructed atop a small plateau with nearly vertical cliffs on all of its sides. Anciently, the citadel was accessible only by a narrow causeway and bridge from the southeast, and by a steep stairway on the west side (Fox 1978, 22-24), making it easily defended from attack. The move to Cumarcah was apparently necessitated by conflict among the major Quiché lineages. As a result, the Nima Quichés founded Cumarcah as their capital in ca. 1400, while the Tamub remained at nearby Chi Izmachi, and the Ilocab founded a new settlement at Mukwitz Chilocab (Burial Mountain of the Ilocab), now called Chisalin, also located in the vicinity (Recinos 1957, 43-44; Fox 1978, 36). Archaeologically, Mukwitz was by far the smallest of the three, indicating the decline in power suffered by the Ilocab (Carmack 1981, 167). The first occupation in the Cumarcah region actually dates to ca. 1250, thus it is likely that the “move” as described here is less a literal migration than the establishment of the citadel as a center of power as the Cavec lineage becomes more prominent (Akkeren, personal communication). 733 Q'ukumatz (Quetzal Serpent) was likely the son of Co Tuha, who acceded upon the death of his father at the hands of the Ilocab. The manuscript always spells the name of this lord as Cucumatz, whereas the creator deity with the same, or similar, name is spelled Qucumatz. The variant spellings may be the result of multiple scribes working on the manuscript, each with his/her own creative ways of spelling. Alternatively, it may simply be a means of distinguishing between the deity and this lord. With Cucumatz, who reigned ca. 1400-1425, we are entering into a period of Quiché history in which historical details are better known. Under the direction of Cucumatz the power of the Quichés expanded northward to the area of present-day Sacapulas in a series of campaigns aided by allied Cakchiquel warriors (Recinos 1957, 133.139). 734 Literally “turning over.” The ancient Maya kept and revered the bones of their ancestors as the foundation of their power and legitimacy. To disturb these bones would be far more serious than to insult the living members of the lineage. It is likely that the bones of the ancestral founders were kept in the great houses. Thus López-Medel wrote that great rulers were buried in the great houses beneath the place where they had exercised rule in life (Carmack 1981, 193). with one another and split apart. Thus there came to be nine lineage divisions because of this contention over the sisters and the daughters. Therefore, when lordship was conceived, twenty-four great houses came to be. When they arrived in ancient times at the top of their citadel, they completed twenty-four great houses there in the citadel of Cumarcah. This citadel was blessed by the lord bishop735 after it was left abandoned. They were advanced in rank,736 differentiated by their benches and their cushions. They were set apart, each according to their glory. Each of the lords of the nine lineages was distinguished by rank: Nine lords of the Cavecs; Nine lords of the Nihaibs; Four lords of the Ahau Quichés; And two of the Ahau Zaquics. Thus they came to be numerous. Many there were behind each of the lords. From the beginning they were the heads of numerous vassals and servants.737 Each of the lineages of lords became crowded. 735 The authors of the Popol Vuh are identifying the citadel of Cumarcah as the capital city of the Quichés at the time of the Spanish conquest. The ruins of its destroyed temples and palaces were blessed by the Roman Catholic bishop Francisco Marroquín in 1539:  “The very illustrious and reverend Señor Don Francisco Marroquín... was in that court, and blessed the place, and there he fixed and raised the standard of faith, the sign of our Redemption; it was in the same place where for so many years the Prince of Darkness, that idol Tojil, had reigned; thus it was a sign of triumph and conquest” (Ximénez 1929-31, I.xxxix.115). Thus the site of Cumarcah remained a center of occupation for survivors of the conquest for at least a few decades following the conquest. Dominicans administered this settlement, which they called Santa Cruz Utatlán. A new city was built nearby in 1555 named Santa Cruz el Quiché (Spanish “Holy Cross of the Quiché). Today Santa Cruz is the capital city of the State (Departamento) of El Quiché, Guatemala. 736 Xeq'aq'ar (they were glorified, advanced in rank). The verb form is derived from q'aq'al (glory, power). We shall now give the titles of each of the lords and of each of their great houses: THE TITLES OF THE CAVEC LORDS738 THESE, then, are the titles of the lords over the Cavecs.739 The first lords are: Ah Pop740 and Ah Pop of the Reception House;741 Ah Tohil and Ah Cucumatz;742 Great Steward of the Cavecs743 and 737 The political organization of the citadel is based on kinship terms, although no true familial relationship need exist. Here the terms are al, k'ajol (child of woman, son of man) which are metaphors for vassals and servants. 738 lines 7788-7802 739 Literally “lords before the faces of the Cavecs.” 740 Aj Pop (He of the Mat), the highest office in the Quiché hierarchy. 741 Aj Pop K'am Ja (He of the Mat Reception House). This is the second highest office. Coto lists this office as a “messenger, errand boy.” Considering the importance of this position, a more likely translation would be “emissary, legate, or vice-ah pop.” “Reception House” likely refers to a reception hall for meeting with visiting dignitaries or for receiving tribute. 742 Aj Tojil, Aj Q'ukumatz (He of Tojil, He of Cucumatz). These are likely priests of the two major patron deities. Q'ukumatz (Quetzal Serpent) was one of the creator deities (see pp. 61, 68-72, 80-82; lines 25, 140-154) 743 Nim Ch'okoj Kaweq (Great Seating Cavec). Ch'okoj is “to seat,” but when used as a title it refers to one who calls people to service, or to a banquet (Varea). Thus Ximénez glosses chocoh as being associated with a “wedding or banquet” (Ximénez 1985, 200). The ch'okoj is also charged with providing the food and drinks for state functions, as well as making pronouncements and public discourses. The nearest English terms for such an office would be a “steward or master of ceremonies,” although these are comparatively minor functions in most modern societies. It is not a minor role in Maya communities. In Santiago Atitlán, it is the cabecera (Spanish: “head person”), the head of the entire confraternity system, that is charged with overseeing the preparation of food and drink, as well as leading the procession of such dishes for large public events. Until the secularization of Guatemalan communities after World War II, the cabecera was the principal political and ecclesiastical authority in traditional Maya communities. Within each individual confraternity, it is the wife of the confraternity head that is charged with preparing the food for communal meals, and it is the confraternity head himself who pays for it, distributes it, and gives a brief discourse Councilor of the Stacks;744 Emissary of the Deer House,745 Councilor in the Ballcourt of Punishment,746 and Mother of the Reception House.747 THESE, then, are the lords over the Cavecs. There are nine lords for each of the great houses and these shall now be shown: THE TITLES OF THE NIHAIB LORDS748 THESE, then, are the lords over the Nihaibs. The first lords are: Lord Magistrate749 and Lord Herald;750 welcoming those in attendance and, where appropriate, explaining the meaning of the event. Bunzel suggests that at Chichicastenango, the ceremonies of the confraternity are “little more than a series of sacramental meals in which the sacred character of food, especially maize and cacao, holds the center of interest, even to the exclusion of the saint in whose honor the ceremony presumably is held.” In conjunction with such meals, “there are long speeches of blessing and a special type of music” (Bunzel 1952, 45-46). The concluding remarks of the Popol Vuh text suggest that the authors were, indeed, the Nim Ch'okoj of the three major Quiché lineages. In that passage the three Nim Ch'okoj are referred to as the “givers of birth, the mothers and fathers of the word,” presumably referring to the text of the Popol Vuh itself (see p. 305; lines 8702-8703). 744 Popol Winaq Chi T'uy (Councilor of the Stacks). Popol Winaq (Mat Person) is the head of a ruling or deliberative council, the unity of the council being symbolized by the interlaced reeds in a woven mat. T'uy is a “stack, pile.” This latter term is likely a reference to tribute. It is common in scenes depicting throne rooms on ancient Maya ceramic vessels to see stacks of tribute in the form of textiles, bark paper, exotic feathers and skins, cacao beans, etc. 745 Lolmet Kej Nay (Emissary of the Deer House). Lolmet (or Lolmay) is an “emissary or ambassador.” Kej is deer. Na[y] is the Lowland Maya version of the Quichéan Ja[y] (house). 746 Popol Winaq pa Jom Tzalatz (Councilor in the Ballcourt of Punishment). Jom is “ballcourt.” Tzal is “war, battle, conflict,” while tzalatz means “punishment, or penalty” (Coto). 747 U Chuch K'am Ja (Mother of the Reception House). This is likely the overseer of the hall where dignitaries are received, or the building where tribute is stored. 748 lines 7803-7814 749 Ajaw Q'alel (Lord Magistrate). Magistrate of the Reception House751 and Great Reception House;752 Mother of the Reception House753 and Great Steward of the Nihaibs;754 Auilix,755 Yacolatam (Corner of the Reed Mat) Zaclatol,756 and Great Emissary of the Sprout Giver.757 Nine, then, were the lords of the Nihaibs. THE TITLES OF THE AHAU QUICHÉ LORDS758 THESE, then, are the titles of the lords of the Ahau Quichés: Herald Person759 and 750 Ajaw Aj Tzik' Winaq (Lord Herald Person). Aj Tzik' is a “crier, proclaimer, speaker, herald, announcer.” 751 Q'alel K'am Ja (Magistrate Reception House). 752 Nima K'am Ja (Great Reception House). 753 U Chuch K'am Ja (Its Mother Reception House). 754 Nim Ch'okoj Nijaib'ab' (Great Steward Nijaibs). 755 Awilix. This is the patron god of the Nijaibs. Likely this is the title for the god’s priest. 756 Yakolatam, U Tza'm Pop Zaklatol. This is a singular instance in the Popol Vuh text where a Nahua language title is supplied with a Quiché translation by the authors. Yakolatam is derived from the Nahua yacatl (point, edge) and tam (leaves). This is followed by a comma in the manuscript, a fairly rare grammatical mark which in this case may indicate a pause for the authors to give a translation of the preceding word into Quiché. U tza'm pop (Quiché: its nose/point/edge/border reed mat) is a rough translation of yakolatam. Zaklatol is a combination of the Nahua zacatl (grass) and tollin (reed), a translation of the preceding pop (reed mat). 757 Nima Lolmet Ye'ol T'ux (Great Emissary Giver of Sprouts). T'ux is a “sprout, or budding blossom.” 758 lines 7815-7822 Lord Emissary;760 Great Lord Steward of the Ahau [Quichés]761 and Lord Hacavitz.762 These are the four lords over the Ahau Quichés. These are the great houses. THE TITLES OF THE ZAQUIC LORDS763 THERE are also two lineages of Zaquic lords: Maize Flower House764 and Magistrate of the Zaquics.765 There is only one house for the two lords. THE GLORY OF THE LORDS OF CUMARCAH766 THUS were established the twenty-four lords as well as the twenty-four great houses. Then their glory and their sovereignty were increased in Quiché. The grandeur and importance767 of the Quichés was glorified and made sovereign. Then as well the 759 Aj Tzik' Winaq (Herald Person). 760 Ajaw Lolmet (Lord Emissary). 761 Ajaw Nim Ch'okoj Ajaw [K' iche' ] (Lord Great Steward Ahau [Quiché]). The authors did not include the full name of the Ahau [Quiché] lineage, although this is implied. 762 Ajaw Jakawitz (Lord Hacavitz). This is likely the priest of the god Hacavitz, the patron deity of the Ahau Quichés. 763 lines 7823-7828 764 Tz'utuju Ja (Maize Flower House). 765 Q'alel Saqik (Magistrate Saquic). 766 lines 7829-7943 canyon-citadel768 was whitewashed and plastered. The nations came there, the small and the great. Thus the lord who made Quiché great has his name. Then were created their glory and their sovereignty. Then they created the homes of their gods, as well as the homes of the lords. But they themselves did not do it, nor did they work to build their homes or the homes of their gods. Instead it was their vassals and their servants, who had become numerous. They did not need to lure them, or abduct them, or carry them off by force, for they truly belonged to each one of the lords. This place also came to be crowded with the lords’ older brothers and younger brothers.769 The lords were ever-solicitous,770 each of them receiving numerous petitions. They were truly beloved. Great was the authority771 of the lords. The birthdays of the lords were honored and respected by their vassals and servants.  Thus they multiplied there in the canyon-citadel. Yet they were still not as many as those who fell under submission from among the nations. Even when war came upon their canyon and their citadel, they were glorified because of the spirit essence of their lords, Lord Cucumatz and Lord Co Tuha. 767 Alal nimal (greatness weightiness/importance). When paired, the combination means “power” (Basseta). 768 Thus not only were the buildings of the fortified hilltop citadel plastered and whitewashed, but the dependent communities in the valleys and canyons below were similarly well built. 769 Atz, chaq' (older brother of a male, younger brother of a male). These likely refer to allies or affiliated lineage heads rather than fraternal brothers. 770 Literally “accumulated their existence.” This is to be “assiduous, solicitous, vigilant, preoccupied.” 771 In modern Quiché usage, q'ale'm is both “authority,” as well as “responsibility for the well-being of someone.” Cucumatz became a truly enchanted lord. In one transformation772 he would rise up into the sky, and in another transformation he would go down to Xibalba. In another transformation he would be a serpent, truly becoming a serpent. In another transformation he would make himself into an eagle; and in another transformation into a jaguar. Truly his appearance would be that of an eagle and of a jaguar. In another transformation he would become a pool of blood. Mere pooled blood he would become. Truly he was an enchanted lord in his essence. Thus all the lords were frightened before his face. Tales about him were quickly spread abroad773 and all the lords of the nations heard of the nature of this enchanted lord. This, then, was the beginning of the increase of the Quichés. Lord Cucumatz founded the grandeur of his descendents. The faces of his grandchildren and his sons were not lost in his heart. He did not do this so that he would be the sole lord. But his nature was enchanted and thus he toppled all the lords of the nations. This he did merely to reveal himself. Yet because of it, he became the head of the nations. The enchanted lord named Cucumatz was of the fourth generation of lords. He alone was both Ah Pop and Ah Pop of the Reception House. He left behind his heritage for his descendents. For they became glorious, and sovereigns as well. And then they begat sons, even their own sons, making them numerous. Thus were begotten Tepepul and Iztayul. These exercised true lordship. They were the fifth generation of lords that came to be. They begat sons as well, each a generation of lords. 772 Wuq'. I base this reading on wuq'e which is “to embody, convince” (Coto). It may also be “to wrap one’s self, envelop, or bundle,” perhaps a reference to the clothing and accoutrements worn in transformational dances. 773 Literally “broke open/shattered its hearing.” This implies an instantaneous and widely disseminated spread of the tale, something like the English expression, “breaking news.” THE VICTORIES OF LORD QUICAB774 THESE, then, are the names of the sixth generation of lords. There were two great and glorious lords: Quicab775 was the name of the first lord, and Cauizimah776 was the 774 lines 7944-8032 775 K'iq'ab' (many hands), the son of Cucumatz, reigned as the Ah Pop of the Nima Quichés from ca. 1425-1475 (Carmack 1981, 122). The name of this lord suggests his power to accomplish what would be impossible for someone with only two hands. It may also suggest the number of vassals and servants he possessed. Quicab’s father, Lord Cucumatz, died in battle in an attempt to avenge the death of his daughter at the hands of his son-in-law, Tecum Sicom, a rival lord at Coha, located somewhere near the modern town of Sacapulas (Recinos 1957, 138-141; Carmack 1981, 134-135), or alternatively Quetzaltenango (Akkeren 2000, 23, 212-213). More recently places Coha in the Quetzaltenango area, although it was allied with the Sacapulas region in opposing the rising power of the Quichés (Akkeren 2000, 23, 212-213). Two years later, his son Quicab along with his Cakchiquel allies invaded the town, seized a large cache of jade and precious metal, and burned the town of Coha to the ground. The surviving lords of Coha were taken back to Cumarcah to be sacrificed (Recinos 1957, 140-147). Quicab also brought the bones of his father back to Cumarcah where they were kept in a bundle. This campaign resulted in the conquest of the northern border regions of the Quiché’s territory. This included the lands of the Cumatz and Tuhal around Sacapulas as well as that of the Mam of Zaculeu. Quicab subsequently expanded his empire by subduing the rival Sajcabaja, Caukeb and Cubulco (Ikomaquib) in the east and extending his influence as far as the upper Usumacinta and Motagua River Valleys. In the west his forces reached the Ocós River near the Isthmus of Tehuantepec in Chiapas, Mexico. Further conquests extended from the Alta Verapaz in the north to the Pacific Ocean near Escuintla in the south, an area of approximately 26,000 square miles (Fox 1978, 3-4). At the height of his power, Quicab fell victim to an internal revolt ca. 1470 (Carmack 1981, 136-137; Carmack and Mondloch 1983, 195-196). As recorded in the Título Totonicapán, all the major lineages, including the Tamub, Ilocab, Rabinals, Cakchiquels, Ah Tziquinahas, and the inhabitants of Sacapulas and Aguateca, gathered at Cumarcah to observe the “Great Dance of Tohil,” the patron deity of the Cavec Quichés. In the presence of all the lords, rebel nobles, apparently related to the same faction that had rebelled against Co Tuha, danced with the deities of the various groups present dressed in skins and hunting attire. At the climax of the dance, the son of a Quiché ah pop began to give sacrificial offerings to Tohil. This act was a cue for rebels to initiate an attack against Quicab and his supporters (Carmack 1981, 136; Carmack and Mondloch 1983, 196; Akkeren 2000, 325-335). Although Quicab survived the revolt, his power and authority were severely diminished. He was forced to “humble himself” before the rebel warriors, who “seized the government and the power” (Recinos and Goetz 1953b). One by one the former vassal states within Quicab’s empire broke away. His old allies, the Cakchiquels, remained loyal but were soon beset by attacks and insults from the new lords of Cumarcah. As a result, according to the Annals of the Cakchiquels, Quicab counseled them to leave the city as well as their old settlement at Chiavar, and establish their own capital independent of the Quichés: “The die is cast. Tomorrow you will cease to exercise here the command and power which we have shared with you. Abandon the city to these k'unum (penises) and k'achaq (dung). Let them not hear your words again, my sons” (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 97). Soon thereafter, in ca. 1470, the Cakchiquels under their lords Huntoh and Vucubatz (who had fought alongside Quicab as his allies) founded the citadel of Iximche', an act that initiated a series of disasterous wars between the Quichés and Cakchiquels that persisted until the coming of the Spaniards in 1524. The Ah Tziquinahas were already independent for most, if not all, of the time of their occupation around Lake Atitlán, leaving the Quichés isolated and surrounded by their enemies. name of the other. These accomplished a great many deeds. They made the Quichés great, for their essence was truly enchanted. They broke apart and shattered the canyons and the citadels of the small nations and the great nations. Anciently these citadels were close together: The mountain of the Cakchiquels was where Chuvila777 is today. The mountain of the Rabinals was Pa Maca.778 The mountain of the Caocs779 was Zaccabaha.780 The citadels, then, of the Zaculeus781 were Chuvi Miquina,782 Xelahu,783 Chuva Tzac,784 and Tzoloh Che.785 776 Ka Wi' Simaj (Two Heads/Tips Sharp). If this lord’s name has significance beyond being a proper name, it may have a double meaning. The “sharpness” may refer to the points of the weapons under his command, but it may also refer to the “sharpness” of his mind (a common expression among the Quichés just as it is in English). The latter is all the more impressive because he has “two heads” with which to be clever. Together, these two rulers combine the benefits of “many deeds” and “many thoughts.” 777 Chuwi' La (Above the Stinging Nettle). This is the site of the modern town of Chichicastenango, which at the time of the Spanish conquest was a Quiché community (as it still is today). The original Quiché version of the Popol Vuh manuscript was discovered here by Francisco Ximénez. 778 Pa Mak'a' (Place of Water Droplets). Alternatively this may be Pa Mak'a (Place of Dawn), a contracted form of mak'ahan (morning, dawn). Akkeren (personal communication) suggests that this may be an abbreviated form of Pa Amaq' A' (Place of the Water of the Nations), the ancient name for the River Motagua which is located some 10 km. away (Hill 1996, 357; Akkeren 2000, 136-137). This is the present.day town of Zacualpa (Fox 1978, 236-237; Carmack 1981, 185). 779 Ka'okeb' (Caocs). The name is likely derived from kawoq, one of the twenty named day-signs of the traditional highland Maya calendar. In the late Postclassic, many of the Caocs moved to the area of Sacatepequez where they were subjugated by the Cakchiquels (Akkeren 2000, 217-218). These are likely the ancestors of the people who settled two communities west of present-day Guatemala City named Santiago Cauque (Sacatepequez) and Santa Maria Cauque (Sacatepequez) (Recinos 1950, 221 n. 4; D. Tedlock 1996, 324 n. 187). 780 Saqkab'a Ja (Plastered House). This is the present-day town of San Andrés Sajcabaja. 781 Saq Ulewab' (White Earths). These are the Mam speakers. Their ancient capital, Zaculeu, is located four kilometers west of present-day Huehuetenango. The Mam region was conquered soon after the campaigns of Quicab against the Sacapulas Valley sites. The Mam remained subject to the Quichés and fought with them against the Spaniards (Fox 1978, 147). 782 Chuwi' Miq'ina' (Above Hot Water). This is likely the site known locally as Chuitinamit, located 700 meters above a series of hot water springs near present-day Totonicapán (Recinos 1950, 221; Fox 1978, 161). This and the next three settlements in the list were all heavily populated Quiché communities at the These all paid homage786 to Quicab. They had made war, but they were broken apart. The canyons and citadels of the Rabinals, the Cakchiquels, and the Zaculeus were shattered. All the nations collapsed and were split apart. Yet for a great while Quicab’s warriors persisted. There were not then even one or two groups among the nations that did not bring their tribute. Their citadels fell, and they brought tribute before Quicab and Cauizimah. These lords invaded the lineages, who were bled and shot while bound to wooden posts.787 Their day came to nothing, nor did they ever have descendents. It was merely time of the Spanish conquest, attesting the effectiveness of Quicab’s military campaigns. They continue to be occupied by Quiché speakers today. 783 Xe' Laju (Below Ten). This is a contracted form of the full name of this site, Xe' Laju[j No'j] (Below Ten No'j—a day on the traditional highland Maya calendar). According to native chronicles, this was the principle settlement in the southern Quetzaltenango basin, although its precise location is unknown. Modern Quetzaltenango is the second largest city in Guatemala. 784 Chuwa Tz'aq (Before Wall/Altar). This is present-day Momostenango (Nahua “Place of the Altars). This community is still known as Chuwa Tz'aq by its Quiché inhabitants. The ruins of the ancient citadel are now called Pueblo Viejo (Spanish “Old Town), located some six kilometers northwest of town. 785 Tz'oloj Che' (Willow Tree). This is in the area of Santa María Chiquimula, likely the nearby ruins known as Pugertinamit located southwest of town (Fox 1978, 129; Carmack 1981, 186). The region became subject to the Nima Quichés in the mid-fifteenth century (Carmack 1973, 291; Recinos 1957). 786 Xrixowaj. This reading is based on xowaj, “to respect, obey, revere, pay homage” (Basseta). 787 This refers to an early form of highland Maya ritual sacrifice or execution. The following is a description from the Annals of the Cakchiquels: Then began the execution of Tolgom. He dressed and covered himself with his ornaments. Then they tied him with his arms extended to a poplar tree to shoot him with arrows. Afterwards all the warriors began to dance. The music to which they danced is called the song of Tolgom. Following this they began to shoot the arrows, but no one of them hit the cords [with which he was tied], but instead they fell beyond the gourd tree, in the place of Qakbatzulú where all the arrows fell. At last our ancestor Gagavitz shot the arrow which flew directly to the spot called Cheetzulú and pierced Tolgom. After which all of the warriors killed him. Some of the arrows entered [his body] and others fell farther away. And when that man died, his blood was shed in abundance behind the poplar. Then they came and completed the division [of pieces of him] among all the warriors of the seven tribes that took part in the offering and the sacrifice, and his death was commemorated thereafter in the month of Uchum. Every year they gathered for their festivals and orgies and shot at the children, but instead [of arrows] they shot at them with alder branches as though they were Tolgom. Thus our grandfathers related of old, arrows that were the means of shattering the citadels. Straightaway the mouth of the earth would be split open and thunder would shatter the stones. Thus the nations would suddenly become frightened and make offerings before the Pine Resin Tree. This has become a sign for the citadels, for today there is a mountain of stones, only a few of which were not cut cleanly as if cut by an axe. It is there in the plain called Petatayub788 where it may be clearly seen by all the people who pass by it. This is the sign of the war prowess of Quicab. He was not killed, nor was he defeated. He was truly a warrior, and he received tribute from all the nations. Then all of the lords planned, sending blockaders around the canyons and around the citadels, all the fallen citadels of the nations. THE QUICHÉS GARRISON THE CONQUERED REGIONS789 THUS the sentinels went forth as lookouts against enemy warriors. They became the lineage of watchmen, guardians of the mountains: “If the nations come again, these will be the guardians,” it was said. Then all the lords gathered their thoughts and sent out their orders: “They shall be as our stockade, as the representatives of our lineage, as our fortress. They shall become our palisade, the expression of our anger, our prowess in war,” said all the lords. oh, our sons! (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 74-75; for a discussion of this sacrificial ritual see Akkeren 2000, 335-341). 788 Campbell suggests that this location is the area today known as Ayutla, near Tapachula, Mexico (located just across the border from Guatemala). The name is likely derived from the Nahua petlatl—reed mat (Campbell 1983, 84). 789 lines 8033-8180 Then the orders were sent out to each of the lineages who were to oppose the enemy warriors. They instructed all of them who were to be sent as guardians of their mountain nations: “Go, for these are our mountains now. Do not fear. If there are still warriors that attack you or kill you, come at once to notify us and we shall go and kill them.” Thus spoke Quicab, along with the Magistrate and the Herald by way of instruction. And so they went to “put the notch of the arrow to the center of the bowstring,”790 as it is said. Thus the grandfathers and fathers came to be separated. All the Quiché people were placed, each of them, on a mountain as guardians. They were guardians of arrows and bowstrings. They went as guardians against war. Thus they did not have a single dawn, nor did they have a single god. They went out to blockade all the citadels: Ah Uuila791 and Ah Chulimal,792 Zaqui Ya793 and Xahbaquieh,794 Chi Temah795 and Vahxalahuh,796 790 Literally “set the mouth (notch) of the arrow on the mouth (the center point) of the bowstring.” The expression refers to being ready for battle. 791 Aj U Wi' La (They of Its Top Stinging Nettles). This is a contracted form of Aj Chuwi' La (They of Above Stinging Nettles), which is Chichicastenango. The inhabitants of Chichicastenango are referred to by this name in the Título de la Casa Ixcuin Nihaib (Recinos 1957, 71; see also footnote 777). 792 Aj Chulimal. This is perhaps a transcription error for Aj Ch'umilal (They of the Stars), one of the lineages mentioned earlier in the text (see foonote 518). 793 Saqi Ya' (White River). Akkeren identifies this as a site west of Chichicastenango (2000, 171). 794 Xajb'a Kiej (Dancing Place/Costume Deer). 795 Chi Temaj (At the Tilt/Slope). Akkeren identifies this, as well as Vahxalahuh as sites near Chichicastenango (2000, 171). 796 Wajxalajuj (Eighteen). Along with Ah Cabracan,797 Chabi Cac,798 and Chi Hunahpu,799 With Ah Maca800 and Ah Xay Abah,801 Ah Zaccabaha802 and Ah Ziyaha,803 Ah Miquina804 and Ah Xelahuh.805 These went forth as war sentinels to the plains and to the mountains. They were guardians of the earth. They were sent out by Quicab and Cauizimah, the Ah Pop and the Ah Pop of the Reception House, as well as by the Magistrate and the Herald. Four lords sent them out to act as sentinels against the warriors. Quicab and Cauizimah were the names of the two lords over the Cavecs; Quema806 was the name of the lord over the Nihaibs; 797 Aj Kab'raqan (They of Earthquake). This is perhaps related to a small community that still carries a similar name, Chicabracan (Place of Earthquakes), nine kilometers east of Utatlan, where there is a group of Precolumbian ruins including a small masonry temple (Fox 1978, 42). 798 Ch'ab'i Q'aq' (Arrow Fire). This is a comet (Coto), or a meteor. Perhaps the same as the settlement of the Uchabahas (see footnote 517). 799 Chi Junajpu (Hunahpu Place). 800 Aj Mak'a' (They of Water Droplets, or alternatively, They of Dawn). Likely the inhabitants of Pa Mak'a', which is today Zacualpa (see footnote 778). 801 Aj Xay Ab'aj (They of Combed Mountain). Akkeren (personal communication) suggests that this should be Ah Xoy Abah (Polishing Stone/Jasper). The Xoy lineage lived along the Chixoy River, centered at the place where the road from the Verapaz region crosses it on its way to Sacapulas. A branch of this lineage settled the modern area of Joyabaj. According to Ximénez, Joyabaj marked the border between the Central Quiché to the west and the Rabinal to the east (Ximénez 1929-31, I.lxxiv.484). 802 Saqkab'a Ja (Whitewashed House). Mentioned as the place of the Caocs. This is the present-day town of Sajcabaja (see footnote 780). 803 This is likely a transcription error for Aj Sija' (They of Flowering Tree Water). This is the present.day community of Santa Catarina Ixtahuacán. 804 Aj Miq'ina' (They of Hot Water). The same as Chuwi' Miq'ina' (Above Hot Water), which is Totonicapán (see footnote 782). 805 Aj Xe' Lajuj (They of Below Ten). This is Quetzaltenango (see footnote 783). Achac Iboy,807 then, was the name of the lord over the Ahau Quichés. These, then, were the names of the lords that sent out messengers and envoys. They left their vassals and their servants on the mountains, on each one of the mountains. And soon after they left, they began to bring back female captives808 and male captives, who were presented before Quicab, Cauizimah, the Magistrate, and the Herald. They made war with the notch of the arrow and the center of the bowstring, taking female captives and male captives. These envoys came to be warlike then. Thus they were given gifts. They were increased. The lords provided for809 them when they came to deliver all of their female captives and male captives. Thus the lords Ah Pop, Ah Pop of the Reception House, Magistrate, and Herald gathered their thoughts. Then they made a proclamation: “We shall ennoble810 they who are truly first among these lineages who have carried the burden of being watchmen.” “I am the Ah Pop.” “I am the Ah Pop of the Reception House.” “The emblems of office of the Ah Pop shall now become yours. You shall be adorned as Lord Magistrates and as Magistrates,” said all the lords when they gathered their thoughts. 806 Kema (Weaving). This may be based either on the verb (to weave) or the noun (textile). I have chosen “Weaving” as it may be understood as either. 807 Achaq Ib'oy (Droppings/Backside/Buttocks Armadillo). 808 Anab' (sister of a man). In this context these are female captives. 809 Literally “heartened.” In Quiché terminology, this is “to tend to, look after, provide for needs.” 810 Literally “to take, grasp, seize,” apparently referring to some ceremonial action when raising a person to the rank of nobility. The Tamub and the Ilocab did the same. The three groups of the Quichés were united.811 Thus they ennobled them, giving them their titles. This, then, was their consensus. But it was not there that they ennobled them. There was a designated mountain on which the first vassals and servants were ennobled. Thus all of them were summoned from each of their mountains. They gathered together as one. THE names of the mountain where they were ennobled were Xe Balax812 and Xe Camac.813 This was the edict that was given. There at Chulimal814 it was done. THE TITLES GIVEN TO THOSE WHO WERE ENNOBLED815 THESE, then, were their titles, their nobility, and the tokens of their office: Twenty magistrates and twenty ah pops, who were raised to nobility by the Ah Pop and the Ah Pop of the Reception House, as well as by the Magistrate and the Herald. Thus all of the magistrates and ah pops received their offices.816 Eleven Great Stewards, Magistrates of the Lords, Magistrates of the Zaquics, Military Magistrates,817 Military Ah Pops, Military Palisade Masters, and Military Border Masters. 811 “Same face.” 812 Xe' B'alax (Under Twisted Cord). 813 Xe' K'a'amaq' (Under String). 814 This mountain was mentioned earlier as one of those conquered by Quicab. 815 lines 8181-8231 816 Eqalem (burden, office, stewardship). These were the titles of the men who were elevated in rank. They were also named to their seats and to their cushions.818 These were the first among the vassals and servants of the Quiché people. They were their watchers and their listeners, the notch of the arrow and the center of the bowstring. They encircled the Quichés as their stockade, their enclosure, their fortress, and their palisade. The Tamub and the Ilocab did likewise. They also ennobled and gave titles to the first among their vassals and their servants on each of the mountains. This therefore was the foundation for the magistrates and ah pops who are assigned to each of the mountains today. This is also the order in which they go out behind the Ah Pop and Ah Pop of the Reception House, and behind the Magistrate and Herald.819 THE NAMES OF THE GODS’ HOUSES820 We shall now tell the names of the houses of the gods. These houses were simply named after the gods themselves: Great Temple of Tohil821 was the name of the temple that served as the house of Tohil of the Cavecs. 817 Q'alel Achij (Magistrate Warriors). Achij is “man” but may also refer to “warriors,” as in this case. Basseta lists this title as “captain.” This office and those that follow are likely military ranks. 818 In Maya custom, dignitaries are seated on their thrones or benches according to rank. 819 This likely refers to the order such officers take when walking in procession, or going out to war. Processions are common in traditional Maya communities, and the order of sequence as to who walks behind who is rather rigid. 820 lines 8232-8325 821 These three temples, dedicated to the patron deities of the Quichés, were the tallest buildings at the site and were arranged on three sides of the central plaza at Cumarcah, although the structure identified as the Hacavitz temple faces away from the plaza (Fernández-Valbuena 1996, 78-80; Cook 2000, 204). The tallest of these was the Temple of Tohil (Carmack 1981, 225-226). Unfortunately, all the stone that once faced the temple has been looted, leaving only its rubble core. It is still possible, however, to determine that Auilix was the name of the temple that served as the house of Auilix of the Nihaibs.822 And Hacavitz was the name of the temple that served as the house of the god of the Ahau Quichés.823 the main entrance to the sanctuary faced east, toward the rising sun. According to Ximénez, who visited the site when it was in much better condition, the temple of Tohil had stairways on all four sides, oriented to the cardinal directions (Ximénez 1929-31, I.xxvii.74-75). This is confirmed by a drawing of the temple made by Rivera y Maestra in 1834 which clearly shows stairways on each of its visible sides. The Temple of Tohil was thus similar to other radial stairway temples constructed by the Maya since at least the Late Preclassic Period (Ca. 200 BC-AD 250). Examples include Structure E-VII-sub at Uaxactun, the Lost World Pyramid at Tikal, Structure 4 at Copan, Structure A-3 at Seibal, El Castillo at Chichen Itza, the Temple of the Seven Dolls at Dzibilchaltun, and the principal temple at Chutixtiox (not far from Cumarcah near Sacapulas). Schele and Mathews associate such radial temples with the first mountain to emerge from the primordial sea at the time of creation (Schele and Mathews 1998, 40-42, 179-182, 368 n. 31). Karl Taube further identifies radial stairway structures as loci for New Fire-making rituals connected with the primordial hearth of creation (Taube 1998, 441-442). Tohil was primarily a fire god, who provided “new fire” for his people by means of a twist-drill (see p. 214; line 5499). John Lloyd Stephens described the appearance of the Temple of Tohil, which he called the Sacrificatorio (Spanish: Place of Sacrifice) in the late 1830s: It is a quadrangular stone structure, sixty-six feet on each side at the base, and rising in a pyramidal form to the height, in its present condition, of thirty-three feet. On three sides there is a range of steps in the middle, each step seventeen inches high, and but eight inches on the upper surface, which makes the range so steep that in descending some caution is necessary. At the corners are four buttresses of cut stone, diminishing in size from the line of the square, and apparently intended to support the structure. On the side facing the west there are no steps, but the surface is smooth and covered with stucco, gray from long exposure. By breaking a little at the corners we saw that there were different layers of stucco, doubtless put on at different times, and all had been ornamented with painted figures. In one place we made out part of the body of a leopard, well drawn and coloured. The top of the Sacrificatorio is broken and ruined, but there is no doubt that it once supported an altar for those sacrifices of human victims which struck even the Spaniards with horror. It was barely large enough for the altar and officiating priests, and the idol to whom the sacrifice was offered (Stephens 1969, II, 183-184). Stephens’ mention of a jaguar (he incorrectly called it a leopard) mural on the temple of Tohil is significant. Tohil was the principal deity of Balam Quitze whose nawal, or animal counterpart, was the jaguar (see p. 245; lines 6766-6779). 822 The Auilix Temple is located just east of the Temple of Tohil across a small plaza. It consists of two terraces with a small sanctuary atop the second terrace. A single wide stairway on the west side gives access to the first terrace (Carmack 1981, 272-274). Thus the principal facades of these two temples face one another. 823 The Temple of Hacavitz is likely the large mound situated on the south side of the main plaza at Cumarcah. Like the other two temples, all the surface stone has been removed and its ancient appearance is thus difficult to determine. Rivera y Maestre (1834) included it in his plan of the city as a pyramidal structure labeled sacrificatorio (Spanish: “place of sacrifice”). According to this aerial view plan, the temple faced south onto its own court and complex of great house structures (Carmack 1981, 277-281). Maize Flower House may surely be seen; Sacrifice House is its other name. These were great temples wherein were the stone gods. There all the lords of the Quichés worshiped. All the nations worshiped there as well. The nations would enter therein to burn offerings before Tohil first. Then they would worship the Ah Pop and Ah Pop of the Reception House. They would come to give their quetzal feathers and their tribute before the lords—each in turn they would give provisions and sustenance to the Ah Pop and the Ah Pop of the Reception House, the great lords who had brought down their citadels. Cucumatz and Co Tuha were enchanted people and enchanted lords. Quicab and Cauizimah were also enchanted lords. They knew if there would be war. It was clear before their faces. They saw if there would be death, if there would be hunger. They surely knew if there would be strife. There was an instrument of sight—there was a book. Popol Vuh was their name for it. But it was not only because of this that they were lords. They were great in their essence. Great as well were their fasts. In order to venerate their temples and venerate their sovereignty, they fasted for long periods of time, and sacrificed824 before the faces of their gods. And this was their method of fasting: For nine score days825 they would fast, and for nine they would sacrifice and burn offerings. Then for thirteen score days they would observe a fast and for thirteen826 they would sacrifice and burn offerings before the face 824 K'ajb'ik. This is specific to the sacrifice of human beings (Coto). 825 B'elej winaq (nine people/scores). As a number this is 9 x 20, or 180. It is evident from the context of this passage that the authors are referring to periods of time, although they do not specify what period it is. For purposes of clarity of meaning I have chosen “days,” which is the likely implied meaning here. of Tohil, as well as before the faces of the other gods. They would eat only zapotes, matasanos, and jocotes.827 They would not eat food made from maize. If they were to sacrifice for seventeen score days, then they would fast for seventeen. Nor did they eat maize. Truly great was the performance of their sacred obligations.828 This was the sign of their essence. Neither would they sleep with their women. They would merely provide for each other, fasting in the houses of the gods. Each day they would merely worship, merely burn offerings, and merely offer sacrifices. They were there in the darkness and at dawn, weeping in their hearts and in their bowels, pleading for the light and the lives of their vassals and servants. They would lift up their faces to the sky for their lordship. This, then, is their pleading before the faces of their gods. This is the crying out of their hearts: THE PRAYER OF THE LORDS TO THEIR GODS829 “YEA, pleasing830 is the day, you, Huracan, and you, Heart of Sky and Earth, you who give abundance831 and new life,832 and you who give daughters and sons. Be at 826 The authors are indulging in a bit of shorthand here. My understanding of the text is that the “score” here is implied. Thus for each period of thirteen score days they fast, they would sacrifice for thirteen scores of days more. 827 These are all tropical fruits (see footnotes 463-469). 828 Awasinik (sacred ritual; divinely sanctioned obligations). These fasts are therefore ritually sanctioned abstinences. 829 lines 8326-8490 830 Atob' is “desirable, pleasing” (Basseta). peace, scatter your abundance and new life. May life and creation be given. May my daughters and my sons be multiplied and created, that they may provide for you, sustain you, and call upon you on the roads, on the cleared pathways, along the courses of the rivers, in the canyons, beneath the trees and the bushes. Give, then, their daughters and their sons. May there be no fault, confinement, shame, or misfortune. May no deceiver come behind them or before them. May they not fall833 or be wounded. May they not be dishonored834 or condemned. May they not fall below the road or above the road. May they not be stricken835 or have impediments836 placed behind them or before them. May 831 Q'anal, “yellowness” (richness, abundance, ripeness). This is specifically the abundance of ripe yellow maize, however it is used by the Quichés to refer to abundance or wealth of any kind (B. Tedlock 1982, 114). According to Ruth Bunzel, it may also refer to rebirth and regeneration: “Qanil (milpa, cornfield). Symbolic of the regeneration of the earth, of rebirth after, death, as exemplified in the growth of corn. ‘Qanil is the day of the milpa, a good day. It is a day to give thanks for one’s siembres [plantings], for harvest and planting. After the harvest one waits for the day qanil, either 2 or 3 qanil, to give thanks. And likewise after planting. This is optional. But it is obligatory for all people to give thanks for their food and their land on the day 8 qanil. And each year one does this, until one dies’” (Bunzel 1952, 282).   832 Räxal, “green/blueness” (vitality, newness, freshness, fertility). The combination of green and yellow is still used ceremonially to refer to the concept of “abundance.” Thus in the prayers of Quiché aj q'ij priests, the litany of deities they invoke include the “green shoulder, yellow shoulder of the world,” described as “the procreative powers of the earth” (Bunzel 1952, 266). 833 Mepajik (may they not fall). This is to fall physically as well as morally (into scandal or shame). A common expression today when saying goodbye, or when passing someone on the road, is matzaq pa b'e (don’t fall on the road). 834 Mejoxowik (may they not be dishonored, seduced, disgraced). This may refer to any type of disgrace, but it applies most particularly to violations of sexual prohibitions. 835 Pak' (strike, blow). This may be physical but it also refers to calumny or slander. The highland Maya are somewhat obsessed by slander and envy, because such things may lead to the ancestors or gods punishing them with illness or death if such words are believed. For this reason they are constantly asking what people are saying about them. When a person falls ill, people discuss at great length whether this is due to some fault on the part of that person, or whether it is the result of groundless slanders. The following is a ceremonial prayer to the Earth deity given by a priest as protection from envy on the day 8 Aq'b'al,designated as the day when ceremonies are to be performed as protection from slander: “Hail, World Tsokomá, come hither; reveal your face and aspect. Thou my seat, thou, my shrine, thou seest me, thou hearest me before this World and the white light of day. It is I who kneel and bow me down before the world of Heaven. Perhaps it is my mission, perhaps it is my sacred office that makes it necessary that I go about before the face and person of the world. Perhaps I pray for wealth from my business and from my land; out of my house and out of my corn and out of my wheat and out of my food and drink. It seems I am you place them on green roads and on green pathways. May they not be blamed or confined. Do not hide yourselves from them nor curse them. May their existence be favored, so that they may be providers and sustainers to you, to your mouths and to your faces, you, Heart of Sky and you, Heart of Earth, you, Bundled Glory,837 and you as well Tohil, Auilix, and Hacavitz, Womb of Sky and Womb of Earth, the Four Sides and the Four Corners. May there be only light, only security within your mouths and before your faces, O gods.” Thus it was that the lords fasted during the nine score days, the thirteen score days, and the seventeen score days as well. They fasted often, crying out in their hearts on behalf of their vassals and servants, as well as on behalf of all their women and children. Thus each of the lords carried out his obligations. This was their way of showing veneration for their lordship. This was the lordship of the Ah Pop, the Ah Pop of the Reception House, the Magistrate, and the Herald. They would go in, two by two in succession,838 to bear responsibility for the nations and all the Quiché people. In unity in this world. It is not my fault, and also there is no fault in my wealth. Divine World, come hither! If we do well, somewhere people feel pain because of it; and also if we are poor, people mistreat us. Always there are slanders and calumnies, fires and flames of envy in the world. But for my part, Divine World, I know that God sees us in the cold wind, at dawn, at midday and at sunset. The Lord of the Clear Light sees us.... And also my beloved wife, may she not fall into error; and may there be no slanders or calumnies concerning her. And perhaps we, too, have slandered and maligned in our folly. Do we not judge and speak before great people and small people? But we do not wish this. We wish only good words before God. And also that good fortune be granted us, to go about as did the people of past time” (Bunzel 1952, 346; cf. Schultze-Jena 1954, 43-44). Watanabe suggests that this conspicuous uneasiness characteristic of highland Maya societies with regard to what the neighbors are thinking and saying “creates the reserve found in Chimalteco interpersonal relations” (Watanabe 1992, 100-101). 836 Toxk'om (impediment, stumbling block) is a physical impediment or obstruction, but also implies stumbling from faults, disputes, or life’s difficulties. 837 Pisom Q'aq'al (Bundled Glory/Flame). This is the sacred bundle left by the four progenitors before their deaths (pp. 254-255; lines 7276-7300). 838 Kejalow kib' (to succeed or replace in office). went forth the foundation839 of their word, and the foundation of their provision and sustenance. The root of the word went forth as well from the Tamub and the Ilocab, along with that of the Rabinals and the Cakchiquels, the Ah Tziquinahas, the Tuhalahas, and the Uchabahas. In unity they would go forth to bear the burden of the Quichés. For this was done for all. They did not merely exercise their lordship. They did not merely receive gifts, nor were they merely provided for or sustained; nor did they merely receive food and drink. All this was not without purpose. They did not achieve their lordship, their glory, or their sovereignty by deception or theft. They did not merely crush the canyons and the citadels of the small nations and the great nations. Great was the price that the nations gave in return. They sent jade and precious metal, the size of four fingers across and even the size of a fist across with the thumb extended. They sent precious gems and glittering stones. They sent as well cotinga feathers,840 oriole feathers,841 and the feathers of red birds.842 The tribute of all the nations thus came before the faces of the enchanted lords Cucumatz and Co Tuha; and also before the faces of Quicab and Cauizimah, the Ah Pop and Ah Pop of the Reception House, Magistrate and Herald. It was no small thing that they did. 839 Xe' (root) refers to the “source, foundation, beginning.” 840 Raxon (Cotinga amabilis) is a dovelike tropical bird with turquoise-blue plumage and a purple breast and throat. According to the Annals of the Cakchiquels, the highly prized feathers of the cotinga were given as tribute by the Cakchiquel clans to the lords of Tulan in the East (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 48). In the Popol Vuh, the cotinga is often paired with the larger quetzal (see p. 68; lines 145-146), and perhaps that bird’s iridescent blue/green feathers are also implied here. 841 K'ub'ul. This is the lowland Maya word for the oriole, as well as other related birds with predominantly yellow feathers. 842 Ch'aktik. According to Basseta, this is “a colorful bird.” In Yucatec, ch'ak is the color red. Likely these three birds were chosen as representative of all the exotic feathers the Quichés received in tribute because they comprise the principal colors of green/blue (the same word in the Quiché language), yellow/orange (also the same word in the Quiché language), and red. Nor was it merely a few of the nations that were brought down. Many groups of nations came with their tribute for the Quichés. The lords had suffered affliction, but they overcame. Their glory did not come quickly, for it was not until Cucumatz that the greatness of their lordship began. We shall now give, then, the sequence of the lords’ generations, along with the names of all the lords. THE GENERATIONS OF QUICHÉ LORDS843 THESE are the generations and the house divisions of lordship, of all who had their dawn: Balam Quitze, Balam Acab, Mahucutah, and Iqui Balam were the first of our grandfathers and fathers when the sun appeared, along with the moon and stars. These, then, are the generations and the house divisions of lordship. We shall truly begin here at the roots. The lords acceded in pairs, each generation of lords succeeding their grandfathers and the lords of the citadel, even each and every one of the lords. Here, then, shall appear the face844 of each of the lords, even each and every one of the lords of the Quichés: 843 lines 8491-8515 844 This passage may refer to an illustration of the heads or faces of each lord. Similar illustrations appear in the lowland Maya Books of Chilam Balam (Craine and Reindorp 1979; Edmonson 1982, 1986). THE DYNASTY OF CAVEC QUICHÉ LORDS845 BALAM Quitze was the founder846 of the Cavecs. Co Caib was the second generation after Balam Quitze. Balam Co Nache, who initiated847 the office of Ah Popol, was the third generation. Co Tuha and Iztayub were the fourth generation. Cucumatz and Co Tuha were the foundation848 for the enchanted lords. They were the fifth generation. Tepepul849 and Iztayul were, then, the sixth house division. Quicab and Cauizimah were the seventh succession of lords, who attained the pinnacle of enchantment. Tepepul850 and Iztayub were the eighth generation. 845 lines 8516-8555 846 Xe'nab'al (root-beginning). 847 Xtikib'an (he planted). 848 U xe' (its root). 849 Tepepul. This name is likely derived from the Nahua tepeuh (conqueror, majesty) and pul/pol (great), giving the reading “Great Conqueror.” The Quiché word tepewal is “glory, majesty, sovereignty.” Alternatively, the name may be derived from the Nahua tepe (mountain) with an augmentative suffix pul/pol (great, large) yielding “Great Mountain” (Campbell 1983, 85). 850 During the reign of this Tepepul (acceded ca. 1475), a severe frost caused a famine at the Cakchiquel capital of Iximche. A spy informed the Quichés of the resultant weakness in the Cakchiquels’ defenses and for a year they prepared their warriors for a decisive invasion. At last Tepepul and Iztayul, accompanied by their patron god Tohil, marched on Iximche. The Cakchiquels, however, had been informed of the attack and were ready for them: When the sun rose on the horizon and shed its light over the mountain, the war cries broke out and the banners were unfurled; the great flutes, the drums, and the shells resounded. It was truly terrible when the Quichés arrived. They advanced rapidly, and their ranks could be seen at once descending to the foot of the mountain.... Then came the encounter. The clash was truly terrible. The shouts rang out, the war cries, the sound of Tecum851 and Tepepul were the ninth generation. Vahxaqui Cam852 and Quicab were the tenth generation of lords. Vucub Noh853 and Cauatepech854 were the eleventh house division of lords. flutes, the beating of drums and the shells, while the warriors performed their feats of magic (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 103). The resulting defeat of the Quichés was a devastating blow from which they never fully recovered. The Annals of the Cakchiquels claims that more than 16,000 Quiché warriors died in the battle (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 103). Tepepul and Iztayul were taken prisoner, as was the image of the god Tohil. The Quichés never again attempted to strike the citadel of Iximche again, although border conflicts and court intrigues continued for decades. 851 Tekum. This is likely “enthroned” based on the Nahua tecalli (throne, seat). Tedlock cites a Quiché dictionary compiled by Fermín Joseph Tirado in 1787 which lists tekum as a “large, black butterfly that flies with great speed” (D. Tedlock 1996, 333 n. 195). 852 Wajxaqi K'a'am (Eight Cord). Recinos (1950, 230 n. 9) suggests that this is likely a Quiché translation of a Nahua language date on the Mexican Calendar, Chicuey Malinalli (Eight Grass). 853 Wuqub' No'j (Seven Thoughts) reigned ca. 1500-1523. This is a day on the traditional 260 day calendar, and is likely the day on which this lord was born. His reign was marked by continued war with the Cakchiquels. In the year 1514, two wars were fought, the first at the river Sotzil and the second at Mukche. The Quiché Magistrate of War (Q'alel Achi) died in the latter conflict and many prisoners were taken. Carmack identifies this lord with Ahpop Tuh, the father of Yaxonkik who was soundly defeated in battle with the Cakchiquels in 1517 (Carmack 1981, 138). The Annals of the Cakchiquels claims that “during this year our fathers and grandfathers destroyed the Quichés once again; they exterminated them as if by lightning” (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 114). In his day, the Quichés also came into closer contact with the Aztecs of Central Mexico. In 1501, the Aztec king Ahuitzotl sent “merchants and officials” to the court of Cumarcah, likely to demand tribute and/or vassalage. The Quichés ordered them out of their territory (Fuentes y Guzmán 1932-33, 6, 47). Apparently Vucub Noh did not feel as comfortable in his position by 1510, for in that year the Quichés began to pay tribute to the Aztec lord Moctezuma in the form of quetzal feathers, gold, precious stones, cacao, and cloth. These payments continued until the fall of the Aztec empire to the Spaniards (Recinos 1957, 84; Carmack and Mondloch 1983, 142). These ties were strengthened by marriage ties. According to the Buenabaj Pictorials, recently discovered by Carmack in the Momostenango area, “the lord Quiché... wed two of the daughters of Mendectzum [Moctezuma] called Malintzin” (Carmack 1973, 371). In 1512, Moctezuma sent an emissary named Witzitzil to warn the Quichés of the arrival of the Spaniards along the Mexican Gulf Coast. He warned them to prepare to defend themselves (Recinos 1957, 84-85). In 1519, a plague broke out at Iximche: “First they became ill of a cough, they suffered from nosebleeds and illness of the bladder. It was truly terrible, the number of dead there were in that period.... Little by little, heavy shadows and black night enveloped our fathers and grandfathers and us also, oh, my sons! when the plague raged” (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 115). The plague lasted at least until 1521 and, although Quiché records do not mention it, it is likely that it spread throughout the Guatemalan highlands. Edmonson suggests that this may have been an epidemic of smallpox, a disease brought by the early Spanish explorers (Edmonson 1965, 5). A similar plague struck Yucatán in 1516: “A pestilence seized them, characterized by great pustules, which rotted their bodies with a great stench, so that the limbs fell to pieces in four or five days” (Landa 1941, 42). Perhaps in order to present a united front against the Spanish threat, Vucub Noh negotiated peace with the Cakchiquel lord Belehe Qat in 1522, ending the protracted war that had raged between the two nations since the time of Lord Quicab (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 118). This cessation of hostilities did not, however, prevent the Cakchiquels from allying themselves with the invading Spaniards against the Quichés. Oxib Quieh855 and Beleheb Tzi856 were the twelfth generation of lords. These exercised lordship when Donadiu857 arrived. They were hung858 by the Castilian859 people. 854 Kawatepech. Tedlock suggests that this name is derived from the Nahua cauani (to leave a memory behind) and tepechtli (base, foundation), yielding a compound that may be read as “founder” (1996, 333 n. 195). 855 Oxib' Kiej (Three Deer). A day on the traditional 260 day calendar. Shortly before the Spanish invasion of Guatemala in 1524, lord Vucub Noh died leaving Oxib Quiej to face the foreign threat (Fuentes y Guzmán 1932-33,7.390). 856 B'elejeb' Tz'i' (Nine Dog). A day on the traditional 260 day calendar. 857 Donadiu (or Tonatiu) was the name given to Don Pedro de Alvarado, the Spanish captain of Hernán Cortés who conquered the highland Maya region of what is today Guatemala. This is the Quiché Maya version of Tonatiuh (Nahua for “sun, heat”), the name by which Alvarado was known to the Aztecs and his Tlaxcalan mercenaries. He likely received this nickname because of his blonde hair, a physical trait unknown in the Precolumbian New World (other than albinos, which are still called “children of the sun” in many Quiché communities). The name may have had further significance for the Quichés, however. Earlier in the Popol Vuh text, the appearance of a new sun represented the death of the old world and the establishment of new, divinely-sanctioned political power. Alvarado as the new “sun” destroys the old world and its gods inaugurating a new age. For this reason, Jesus Christ as the newly-established patron deity is equated with the sun throughout the Maya world (La Farge and Byers 1931, 113-114; La Farge 1947, 104; Mace 1970, 24; Thompson 1970, 234; Vogt 1970, 4; Morley et al. 1983, 465; Cook 1986, 140, 148; Tarn and Prechtel 1986, 174, 180-181; Freidel et al. 1993, 292; Cook 2000, 215-219). At Jacaltenango, there is a myth for the foundation of the town in which Christ’s birth is associated with the first rise of the sun, whose rays kill his enemies who had tried to hide in caves and under water. This allows Jacaltenango to be founded in the center of the world. La Farge and Byers suggest that this myth is a syncretized version of the account of the dawn in the Popol Vuh, which also ended the previous age and turned its inhabitants to stone (La Farge and Byers 1931, 113-114). At Santiago Atitlán, Maya sculptors carved a vessel bearing a sun on the left and right sides of the community’s colonial era church altarpiece. In his explanation of the sun vessels, one of the sculptors, Diego Chávez Petzey, said that the sun on the left represents a tortilla, because maize is the Maya “sun.” The sun on the right is the Christian eucharistic Host. He went on to say that life cannot exist without sacrifice. Maize must be crushed on a grinding stone before it can be made into tortillas. The wheat in the sacramental Host must also be ground and baked. The sun can only rise in the east after it has been buried in the west: “Tortillas, the Host, Jesus Christ, and the sun give life because they are first killed. Tortillas and bread result from the death of maize and wheat so that they can give us life. They are therefore gods.” Nicolás Chávez Sojuel, who also worked on the altarpiece carvings, told me that when the Spaniards came the earth died along with the ancient gods and kings. When I asked him how the world could die, he replied: “The earth has died many times. Each time the world and its gods are reborn to new life and they regain their former power and new gods are added.... The saints today have Spanish names because the old earth died in the days of the Spanish conquerors. When the spirit keepers of the world appeared again they were the saints, but they do the same work that the old gods did anciently” (Christenson 2001, 135).    858 Following a brief and disasterous defensive campaign led by the ruler’s grandson, Tecum (who was killed at the decisive battle at Quetzaltenango), the Quiché lords Oxib Quieh and Beleheb Tzi invited Pedro de Alvarado and his conquering army to enter their capital city of Cumarcah without resistance on March 7, 1524. Once inside the city, Alvarado suspected treachery and ordered the arrest, torture, and execution of Tecum860 and Tepepul861 paid tribute before the faces of the Castilian people. These had been begotten as the thirteenth generation of lords. the lords. The following is taken from his report to Hernán Cortés: “And I saw that by occupying their land and burning it I could bring them into the service of His Majesty. Thus I decided to burn the lords who, at the time I desired to burn them, as would appear in their confessions, admitted that they were the ones who had ordered and carried on the war.... Therefore since I knew them to have such ill will toward the service of His Majesty, and for the good and tranquility of the land, I burned them, and I commanded to be burned the town of Utatlan [the Nahuatl language version of Cumarcah as named by Alvarado’s Tlaxcalan mercenaries] to its foundations, for it was dangerous and strong.... All they that were taken prisoners of war were branded and made slaves” (Alvarado 1946 [1524], 457-459, translation by author). The Cakchiquel version of this incident, as recorded in the Annals of the Cakchiquels, confirms that the Quiché lords were burned: “Then [the Spaniards] went forth to the city of Gumarcaah, where they were received by the kings, the Ahpop and the Ahpop Qamahay, and the Quichés paid them tribute. Soon the kings were tortured by Tunatiuh. On the day 4 Qat [March 7, 1524] the kings Ahpop and Ahpop Qamahay were burned by Tunatiuh. The heart of Tunatiuh was without compassion for the people during the war” (Recinos and Goetz 1953b, 120). It is unclear whether Alvarado’s suspicion of treachery was well-founded, however, Fray Bartolomé de las Casas believed that the Quiché lords were executed for failing to satisfy Alvarado’s demand for gold, which is rare in Guatemala: “Guiltless of other fault and without trial or sentence, he immediately ordered them to be burned alive. They killed all the others with lances and knives; they threw them to savage dogs, that tore them to pieces and ate them; and when they came across some lord, they accorded him the honour of burning in live flames. This butchery lasted about seven years from 1524 to 1531. From this may be judged what numbers of people they destroyed” (MacNutt 1909, 352-353). This version of events is supported by the sixteenth century account of the trip to Spain by don Juan Cortés in 1557, in which Alvarado is accused of burning the grandfather of don Juan because he “did not give him gold” (Carrasco 1967, 253). The “hanging” mentioned in this passage of the Popol Vuh likely refers not to the execution of the lords, which was by flame, but rather to the torture and elicitation of confessions mentioned by both Alvarado and the Cakchiquel document. Tedlock notes that the method for obtaining such confessions, according to the Spanish methods of the time, was to hang a prisoner by the wrists while inflicting various types of torture (D. Tedlock 1996, 334 n. 195). Undoubtedly this must have been done in a very public way to have impressed the authors of the text writing decades after the event. 859 Castilian. Technically the inhabitants of the Castile region of Spain, however, the term was used in the sixteenth century to refer to Spaniards in general. 860 These were the sons of the Ah Pop and Ah Pop of the Reception House executed by the Spaniards during the Conquest. They served as lords of Santa Cruz Utatán, built over the ruins of the old capital Cumarcah. Although at first they paid tribute to the Spaniards, there is some evidence that they eventually rebelled. Carmack identifies Tecum as a certain Chignauiucelut (Nahua for 9 Jaguar), the leader of a revolt mentioned by Fuentes y Guzmán who was “put in possession of the government at Utatlan by Don Pedro de Alvarado on the death of his father” (Fuentes y Guzmán 1932-33, 8.48; Carmack 1981, 308). His rebellion was likely tied to the revolt that involved the communities of Aguacatan, Sacapulas, and Utatlan and which was described in the actas de cabildo dated at the end of 1534: “The devil appeared before them and told them that soon all the Christians of this city [Santiago] would die and that they should kill those other Spaniards found in towns outside of the city. Thus it was that in some of these towns more than ten Spaniards were murdered and sacrificed, along with a great number of their Indian slaves and servants” (Kramer 1994, 122). The rebellion was quickly put down by Pedro de Alvarado’s brother Jorge who punished the rebels by “killing them, throwing them to the dogs, hanging them, and throwing them into pits” (Ibid., 122). Lord Tecum was likely one of those hung after he was captured in Chiquimula in 1534 or 1535. Don Juan de Rojas862 and Don Juan Cortes863 were the fourteenth generation of lords, begotten sons of Tecum and Tepepul. 861 Tepepul is identified by the Nahua version of his calendric name Chicuey Quiaguit (Nahua: “8 Rain”) in the early Colonial document, Don Juan Cortés, cacique de Santa Cruz Quiché (Carrasco 1967, 253). According to the Annals of the Cakchiquels, the Quiché lord Quivawit Caok (8 Rain), was hung by Alvarado on May 26, 1540 along with the Cakchiquel lord Ahpozotzil Cahi Ymox. They were both in prison at the time for rebellion (Recinos and Goetz 1953, 132). Colonial records list a Quiché ruler named Sequechul (likely a poor transcription for Tepepul) who was imprisoned for participating in an insurrection and eventually hung in 1540 (Recinos 1950, 232 n. 12). Soon after this incident, Alvarado left Guatemala in search of a western sea-route from Mexico to the Spice Islands (Philippines). He never returned, dying in Michoacan a year later in 1541 (Akkeren 2003). 862 Juan de Rojas, son of Tecum (9 Jaguar), was eventuallly recognized by the Spaniards as the Ah Pop of the Cavec lineage. At some point following the Spanish conquest, the surviving lords of the highland Maya lineages were baptized as Christians and adopted Spanish names. Ximénez doubted that this took place when Alvarado invaded highland Maya territory, and suggested that the baptisms began several years later when the first missionaries arrived in Guatemala (Ximénez 1929-31, I.xli.128). Roman Catholicism was not formally established in Guatemala until 1534, when Bishop Francisco Marroquín arrived in the capital city of Santiago de los Caballeros (Pueblo Viejo, a town not far from the present-day city of Antigua), recently founded by Jorge de Alvarado, the brother of the conqueror Pedro de Alvarado. Over the next few years, Bishop Marroquín sent a few missionary friars with portable altars to the various Indian towns and villages to baptize the inhabitants and destroy any remnants of “idolatry” and “paganism” that may have survived the purges of the conquest itself. There were instances of serious resistance to the labors of the missionaries. The following is an account given by Ximénez: It happened in this kingdom soon after being conquered that, hearing of the lives of Christ and of Our Lady, John the Baptist, and Saint Peter and others which the priests had taught them, there arose a Mexican Indian, a pseudo-prophet. He taught them that Huhapu [Hunahpu] was God, and that Hununapu [One Hunahpu] was the son of God; Xuchinquezal, which is Mexican, or Aquiexquic [Xkik', or Lady Blood] was Saint Mary; Vaxaquicab was Saint John the Baptist, and Huntihax was Saint Paul. This caused so much commotion among the Indians that the kingdom was nearly lost because of it, for they came to imagine that our Holy Gospel told them nothing new and that they already knew of it (Ximénez 1929-31, I.xxiii.57). Early evangelization efforts focused on survivors of the old highland Maya nobility in the hope that they would set an example for the rest of the people. Baptism was also a necessary step for any Maya of noble birth who aspired to a place in the new political order, since without it the Spanish authorities would not recognize their legitimacy or territorial claims. That this is the case here is evident by the title “Don.” This was given to those Maya noblemen who professed faith in Christ as well as those who could prove their legitimacy in court. Many of the documents composed by the Maya in the sixteenth century were “titles” written for the purpose of establishing the legal legitimacy of former ruling lords and their descendents in an effort to recover hereditary honors. As noblemen recognized by the Spanish Crown, they were allowed to receive some tribute from their subjects, to be exempt from compulsory labor, and to ride horses. In addition, baptism afforded a measure of protection from the excesses of Spanish rule. Without it, unconverted Maya were subject to enslavement until the reforms of Governor Alonso López de Cerrato abolished the practice after 1548. Don Juan de Rojas was likely named after the Spanish captain Diego de Rojas who came to Guatemala at the orders of Hernán Cortés in the latter half of 1524 with fifty Spanish soldiers (Akkeren 2003). Thus, Juan de Rojas must have been born sometime between this year and ca. 1530 when Diego de Rojas departed for Peru. When his father was hung in ca. 1535, Juan de Rojas would have been too young to rule, leaving the Quichés without effective leadership for some time. He had begun to exercise some measure of THE GREAT HOUSES OF THE CAVEC LORDS864 THESE are the generations, the house divisions of lordship, for the Ah Pop and Ah Pop of the Reception House over the Cavec Quichés. We shall now name the great houses of each of the lords of the lineages after the Ah Pop and Ah Pop of the Reception House. These are the nine great houses of the nine lineages of the Cavecs, along with the titles for each of the lords of the great houses: Lord Ah Pop has one great house; Guarded House865 is the name of this great house.866 power by at least 1550, when he became involved in a land dispute and demanded that certain merchants from the Utatlan area pay tribute to him (Lutz 1994, 25-26 n. 28). In his mature years as a native cacique, Juan de Rojas collected tribute, carried out censuses, provided labor, enforced church attendance and instruction, and acted as the principal judge in local disputes (Carmack 1981, 313). According to Ximénez, Juan de Rojas was given a special hall at the Royal Palace of Guatemala next to that of the president. Here he administered the affairs of the Maya as the vassal lord of the Spaniards (Ximénez 1929-31, I.xxviii.79). 863 Juan Cortés, son of Tepepul, was recognized by the Spaniards as the Ah Pop of the Reception House. Juan Cortés petitioned the Spanish crown to restore the rights and privileges of lordship that the ancient Quiché lords had enjoyed prior to the Conquest. Accompanied by a Dominican priest, he sailed to Spain in 1557 to press his claim before King Philip II (Carrasco 1967). Unfortunately his ship was attacked by French pirates who seized his documents, which may have included Precolumbian painted codices. He was nevertheless granted audiences before high officials in Spain. Ultimately, Franciscans who opposed the efforts of the Dominicans in favor of the Quiché lords succeeded in opposing these claims on the grounds that it would foster further revolts by the Indians. Spanish authorities in Guatemala also urged caution in granting too much authority to the old Quiché nobility. In a letter to the Spanish crown written in 1552 by Alonso López Cerrato, Governor of Guatemala, the ancient Quiché lords wielded tremendous religious as well as political power over their subjects and could prove dangerous if they were to rebel, “because anciently they revered [them] as gods, and if this persists, the lords could raise the land easily” (Carmack 1973, 379). 864 lines 8556-8595 865 K'u Ja (Guarded House). K'u is “guarded, hidden, covered.” Coto lists Qu hay as a “granary,” indicating that such guarded houses may have been used to hold food stores or tribute payments. 866 John Lloyd Stephens, who visited the site of Cumarcah in the late 1830s, gave the following description of the principal palace (or great house) there: In part, however, the floor remains entire, with fragments of the partition walls, so that the plan of the apartments can be distinctly made out. This floor is of a hard cement, which, though year after year washed by the floods of the rainy season, is hard and durable as stone. The inner walls were covered with plaster of a finer description, and in Lord Ah Pop of the Reception House; Bird House867 is the name of this great house. Great Steward of the Cavecs has one great house. Lord Ah Tohil has one great house. Lord Ah Cucumatz has one great house. Councilor of the Stacks has one great house. Emissary of the Deer House has one great house. Councilor in the Ballcourt of Punishment guards his great house. Tepeu Yaqui868 has one great house. THESE, then, are the nine lineages of the Cavecs. Numerous are the vassals and servants that pertain to the nine great houses. corners where there had been less exposure were the remains of colours; no doubt the whole interior had been ornamented with paintings (Stephens 1969, II, 183). This was likely the principal great house of the site belonging to the Ah Pop of the Cavecs located in the southwest corner of Cumarcah. Wauchope began excavation of this palace complex in 1970 and uncovered a small fragment of a mural in the northern section depicting “a blue lake with yellow shells, covered by an ornamented canopy, with a much-plumed green snake winding above it” (Wauchope 1965, 67). This was painted on the walls of a small room with white-plaster floors and clay walls. Wallace continued work at the site and uncovered further traces of these murals. The principal scene depicts a warrior painted in Mixteca-Puebla style covered with jade beads and feathers and carrying a shield in one hand and a rattle in the other (Carmack 1981, 291). Another mural discovered by Wallace depicts the lower portion of a dancing monkey, perhaps a reference to the twin sons Hun Batz and Hun Chouen who were transformed into monkeys and became the patron deities of scribes and artists. 867 Tz'ikina Ja (Bird House). 868 Tepew Yaki (Sovereign Yaqui/Mexican). This office does not appear in the previous list of Cavec titles. This office appears in place of the “Mother of the Reception House.” There is a people with a similar name (see p. 229). THE DYNASTY OF NIHAIB LORDS869 THESE, then, are the nine highest of the great houses of the Nihaib. We shall first give the dynasty870 of lords: They had but one root, planted before the root of the sun and the light of the people. Balam Acab was their first grandfather and father. Co Acul and Co Acutec were the second generation. Co Chahuh871 and Co Tzibaha872 were the third generation. Beleheb Queh873 was the fourth generation. Co Tuha874 was the fifth generation. Batza875 was the sixth generation. Iztayul was the seventh generation. Co Tuha headed the eighth house division of lordship. Beleheb Queh was the ninth house division. Quema,876 as he is called now, was the tenth generation. Lord Co Tuha was the eleventh generation. Don Christoval, as he is called, exercised lordship under the Castilian people. 869 lines 8596-8631 870 Le'ab'al rib' ajawarem (self-generation lordship). This is a dynastic list or genealogy. 871 K'o Chajuj (Lord Guardian). 872 K'o Tz'ib'a Ja (Lord Writing/Painting House). 873 B'elejeb' Kej (Nine Deer). A day on the traditional 260 day calendar. 874 K'o Tuja (Lord Sweatbath). 875 B'atz'a (Thread/Howler Monkey). 876 Kema (Loom). Don Pedro de Robles is the Lord Magistrate today. THE GREAT HOUSES OF THE NIHAIB LORDS877 THESE, then, are all the lords who follow behind the Lord Magistrate. We shall list now the lords of each of the great houses: Lord Magistrate is the first lord over the Nihaibs. He has one great house. Lord Herald has one great house. Lord Magistrate of the Reception House has one great house. Great Reception House has one great house. Mother of the Reception House has one great house. Great Reception House has one great house. Great Steward of the Nijaibs has one great house. Lord Auilix has one great house. Yacolatam (Corner of the Reed Mat) has one great house. THESE, then, are the names of the great houses over the Nijaibs, of the nine lineages of the Nijaibs, as they are called. There are many lineages among them, each exercising lordship. We have listed the first among these. 877 lines 8632-8663 THE DYNASTY OF AHAU QUICHÉ LORDS878 THESE, then, are they of the Ahau Quichés: Mahucutah was their grandfather and father. He was the first person. Co Ahau was the name of the second generation lord. Caq Lacan,879 Co Cozom,880 Co Mahcun,881 Vucub Ah,882 Co Camel,883 Co Yaba Coh,884 Vinac,885 Bam.886 878 lines 8664-8679 879 Kaq' Lakan (Red/Fire Banner). 880 The manuscript reads qo cozom. This is most likely K'o Q'osom (Lord Thicket/Bramble/Chaff) The precise meaning of this name is unclear, however, because of the limitations of the Latin alphabet used. Cozom may also be read as Kosom (Fatigued/Perplexed); K'osom (Reclined); or Qosom (Turkey Ruffling His Wings). 881 Maj Kun. Aj Kun is a “healer/doctor.” The m-prefix is a negative marker, which would make the name read something like “Not a Healer.” As a verb, maj is “to seize, steal, grasp.” Thus an alternative might be “Seizes Medicine.” 882 Wuqub' Aj (Seven Reed/Cane). A day in the traditional 260 day calendar. 883 K'o Kame'l (Lord Humble). 884 K'o Yab'a Koj (Lord Sick Puma). 885 Winaq (Person). 886 B'am (Counselor/Doer). THE GREAT HOUSES OF THE AHAU QUICHÉ LORDS887 These, then, are the lords over the Ahau Quichés. These are their generations and house divisions as well. These are the titles of the lords within each of the great houses. There are only four great houses: Herald Lord is the name of the first lord. He has one great house. Emissary Lord is the second lord. He has one great house. Great Steward Lord is the third lord. He has one great house. Hacavitz, then, is the fourth lord. He has one great house. Thus there are four great houses over the Ahau Quichés. THE THREE GREAT STEWARDS AS MOTHERS OF THE WORD888 THESE, then, are the three Great Stewards. They are like the fathers of all the Quiché lords. As one the three stewards gathered together as the givers of birth, the mothers of the word, and the fathers of the word.889 Great, in a small way, is the essence of these three stewards. THESE are: The Great Steward before the Cavecs; before the Nijaibs is the second Great Steward; and before the Ahau Quichés is the third Great Steward. Thus there are three stewards, one before each of the lineages. 887 lines 8680-8695 888 lines 8696-8716 889 The Nim Ch'okoj (Great Stewards) of the three principal Quiché lineages identify themselves here as the authors of the “word,” likely the Popol Vuh manuscript itself. But this is the essence of the Quichés, because there is no longer a way of seeing890 it. It was with the lords at first, but it is now lost.891 There is only this. All is now completed concerning Quiché, called Santa Cruz.892 890 Ilb'al (means of seeing, instrument of sight). This is the term used exclusively in the manuscript to describe the original Precolumbian codex version of the Popol Vuh (see pp. 64, 287; lines 50-57, 8276). 891 Sachinaq (lost, vanished). 892 Bishop Francisco Marroquín blessed the ruins of Cumarcah in 1539, renaming it Santa Cruz (Spanish: “Holy Cross”). In about 1555, the Spaniards founded a new administrative center three miles to the east, which they also named Santa Cruz del Quiché (Spanish: Holy Cross of the Quiché). This was likely carried out under the direction of Alonso de Zorita who administered affairs in various Guatemalan provinces beginning in March 1555, including the area of Utatlan. Akkeren suggests that this compilation of the Popol Vuh was carried out in conjunction with the abandonment of the old capital (Akkeren 2003). The resettlement process, which the Spaniards called congregación (congregation), followed a uniform pattern throughout Guatemala (García Peláez 1943, 161-166; Betancor and Arboleda 1964). First, a church was erected at the center of the proposed site fronted by an open plaza, or atrio, for large assemblies to gather for public ceremonies and indoctrination. The rest of the town was organized into squares divided by streets laid out to the cardinal directions. While the new settlement was under construction, families planted their maize on plots the Spaniards assigned to them in the nearby countryside. When the crops were ready to harvest, the older Precolumbian structures were destroyed to prevent reoccupation, and the people moved into their new homes. Christian missionaries staged elaborate dances and festivals to celebrate the event “so that they would forget their ancient dwellings” (García Peláez 1943, 163). PAPERS OF THE PEABODY MUSEUM OF AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY AND ETHNOLOGY, HARVARD UNIVERSITY Vol. IV. – No. 1 REPRESENTATION OF DEITIES OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS BY DR. PAUL SCHELLHAS SECOND EDITION, REVISED WITH 1 PLATE OF FIGURES AND 65 TEXT ILLUSTRATIONS TRANSLATED BY MISS SELMA WESSELHOEFT and MISS A. M. PARKER Translation revised by the Author CAMBRIDGE, MASS. PUBLISHED BY THE MUSEUM DECEMBER, 1904. NOTE. In order to make more widely known and more easily accessible to American students the results of important researches on the Maya hieroglyphs, printed in the German language, the Peabody Museum Committee on Central American Research proposes to publish translations of certain papers which are not too lengthy or too extensively illustrated. The present paper by one of the most distinguished scholars in this ﬁeld is the ﬁrst of the series. F. W. PUTNAM. Harvard University September, 1904. (3) PREFACE. Since the ﬁrst edition of this pamphlet appeared in the year 1897, investigation in this department of science has made such marked progress, notwithstanding the slight amount of material, that a revision has now become desirable. It can be readily understood, that a new science, an investigation on virgin soil, such as the Maya study is, makes more rapid progress and develops more quickly than one pertaining to some old, much explored territory. In addition to numerous separate treatises, special mention should be made of Ernst Förstemann’s commentaries on the three Maya manuscripts (Kommentar zur Mayahandschrift der Königlichen öffentlichen Bibliothek zu Dresden, Dresden 1901, Kommentar zur Madrider Mayahandschrift, Danzig 1902, and Kommentar zur Pariser Mayahandschrift, Danzig 1903) which constitute a summary of the entire results of investigation in this ﬁeld up to the present time. The proposal made in the ﬁrst edition of this pamphlet, that the Maya deities be designated by letters of the alphabet, has been very generally adopted by Americanists, especially by those in the United States of America. This circumstance, in particular, has seemed to make it desirable to prepare for publication a new edition, improved to accord with the present state of the science. Warmest thanks are above all due to Mr. Bowditch, of Boston, who in the most disinterested manner, for the good of science, has made possible the publication of this new edition. January, 1904. P. SCHELLAS. (5) THE MATERIAL OF THE MANUSCRIPTS. The three manuscripts which we possess of the ancient Maya peoples of Central America, the Dresden (Dr.), the Madrid (Tro.-Cort.) and the Paris (Per.) manuscripts, all contain a series of pictorial representations of human ﬁgures, which, beyond question, should be regarded as ﬁgures of gods. Together with these are a number of animal ﬁgures, some with human bodies, dress and armor, which likewise have a mythologic signiﬁcance. The contents of the three manuscripts, which undoubtedly pertain to the calendar system and to the computation of time in their relation to the Maya pantheon and to certain religious and domestic functions, admit of the conclusion, that these ﬁgures of gods embody the essential part of the religious conceptions of the Maya peoples in a tolerably complete form. For here we have the entire ritual year, the whole chronology with its mythological relations and all accessories. In addition to this, essentially the same ﬁgures recur in all three manuscripts. Their number is not especially large. There are about ﬁfteen ﬁgures of gods in human form and about half as many in animal form. At ﬁrst we were inclined to believe that further researches would considerably increase the number of deities, but this assumption was incorrect. After years of study of the subject and repeated examination of the results of research, it may be regarded as positively proved, that the number of deities represented in the Maya manuscripts does not exceed substantially the limits mentioned above. The principal deities are determined beyond question. The way in which this was accomplished is strikingly simple. It amounts essentially to that which in ordinary life we call “memory of persons” and follows almost naturally from a careful study of the manuscripts. For, by frequently looking attentively at the representations, one learns by degrees to recognize promptly (7) similar and familiar ﬁgures of gods, by the characteristic impression they make as a whole, or by certain details, even when the pictures are partly obliterated or exhibit variations, and the same is true of the accompanying hieroglyphs. A purely inductive, natural science-method has thus been followed, and hence this pamphlet is devoted simply to descriptions and to the amassing of material. These ﬁgures have been taken separately out of the manuscripts alone, identiﬁed and described with the studious avoidance of all unreliable, misleading accounts and of all presumptive analogies with supposedly allied mythologies. Whatever cannot be derived from the manuscripts themselves has been wholly ignored. Hypotheses and deductions have been avoided as far as possible. Only where the interpretation, or the resemblance and the relations to kindred mythologic domains were obvious, and where the accounts agreed beyond question, has notice been taken of the fact so that the imposed limitations of this work should not result in one-sidedness. Since, for the most part, the accounts of Spanish authors regarding the mythology of the Mayas correspond only slightly or not at all with these ﬁgures of gods, and all other conjectures respecting their signiﬁcance are very dubious, the alphabetic designation of the deities, which was tentatively introduced in the ﬁrst edition of this work, has been preserved. This designation has proved to be practical. For the plate at the end of this pamphlet, examples as characteristic as possible of the individual ﬁgures of gods have been selected from the manuscripts. It is a well known fact that we possess no deﬁnite knowledge either of the time of the composition or of the local origin of the Maya manuscripts. The objection might, therefore, be raised that it is a hazardous proceeding to treat the material derived from these three manuscripts in common, as if it were homogeneous. But these researches themselves have proved beyond a doubt, that the mythologic import of the manuscripts belongs to one and the same sphere of thought. Essentially the same deities and the same mythologic ideas are, without question, to be found in all the manuscripts. The material of the inscriptions has been set entirely at one OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. side, because the style of representation contained in them, both of the mythologic forms and of the hieroglyphs, renders comparison exceedingly difﬁcult. In this ﬁeld especial credit is due to Förstemann and Seler, for the work they have done in furtherance of interpretation, and mention should not be omitted of the generosity with which the well known promoter of Americanist investigations, the Duke of Loubat, has presented to the Berlin Museum of Ethnology costly originals of reliefs and inscriptions for direct study. The representations on the reliefs from the Maya region, it is true, give evidence of dealing with kindred mythologic conceptions. Figures and hieroglyphs of gods, made familiar by the manuscripts, can also be found here and there. But on the whole so little appears in support of instituting a comparison with the manuscripts, that it seems expedient to leave the inscriptions for independent and special study. I. REPRESENTATIONS OF GODS. A. The Death-God. God A is represented as a ﬁgure with an exposed, bony spine, truncated nose and grinning teeth.1 It is plainly to be seen that the head of this god represents a skull and that the spine is that of a skeleton. The pictures of the death-god are so characteristic in the Maya manuscripts that the deity is always easily recognized. He is almost always distinguished by the skeleton face and the bony spine. Several times in the Dresden manuscript the death-god is pictured with large black spots on his body and in Dr. 19b a woman with closed eyes, whose body also displays the black spots, is sitting opposite the god. While the Aztecs had a male and a female death-deity, in the Maya manuscripts we ﬁnd the death-deity only once represented as feminine, namely on p. 9c of the Dresden manuscript. Moreover the Dresden manuscript contains several different types of the death-god, having invariably the ﬂeshless skull and (with the exception of Dr. 9c) the visible vertebrae of the spine. Several times (Dr. 12b and 13b) he is represented apparently with distended abdomen. A distinguishing article of his costume is the stiff feather collar, which is worn only by this god, his companion, the war-god F, and by his animal symbol, the owl, which will both be discussed farther on. His head ornament varies in the Dresden Codex; in the ﬁrst portion of the manuscript, See Plate for representations of the gods, A-P (10) OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. relating in part to pregnancy and child-birth (see the pictures of women on p. 16, et seq.), he wears on his head several times a ﬁgure occurring very frequently just in this part of the Dresden Codex and apparently representing a snail (compare Dr. 12b and 13b), which among the Aztecs is likewise a symbol of parturition. In view of these variations in the pictures of the Dresden Codex, it is very striking that in the Codex Tro.-Cortesianus, there is only one invariable type of the death-god. A distinguishing ornament of the death-god consists of globular bells or rattles, which he wears on his hands and feet, on his collar and as a head ornament. As can be distinctly seen in Dr. 11a, they are fastened with bands wound around the forearm and around the leg; in Dr. 15c these bells are black. Among the symbols of the death-god a cross of two bones should be mentioned, which is also found in the Mexican manuscripts. This cross of bones seems to occur once among the written characters as a hieroglyph and then in combination with a number: Tro. 10.* The ﬁgure is also a frequent symbol of the death-god. Its signiﬁcance is still uncertain, but it also occurs among the hieroglyphs as a death-sign and as a sign for the day Cimi (death). The hieroglyphs of the death-god have been positively determined (see Figs. 1 to 4). Figs. 1 and 2 are the forms of the Dresden manuscript and Figs. 3 and 4 are those of the Madrid manuscript. God A is almost always distinguished by two hieroglyphs, namely Figs. 1 and 2 or 3 and 4. Moreover the hieroglyphs are always the same, have scarcely any variants. Even in Dr. 9c, where the deity is represented as feminine, there are no variations which might denote the change of sex. The hieroglyphs consist chieﬂy of the head of a corpse with closed eyes, and of a skull. The design in front of the skull in Figs. 2 and 4 and under it in Fig. 3 is a sacriﬁcial knife of ﬂint, which was used in slaying the sacriﬁces, and is also frequently pictured in the Aztec manuscripts. The dots under Fig. 1 are probably intended to represent blood. The death-god is represented with extraordinary frequency in all the Maya manuscripts. Not only does the ﬁgure of the god itself occur, but his attributes are found in many places where his picture is missing. Death evidently had an important signiﬁcance in the mythologic conceptions of the Mayas. It is connected with sacriﬁce, especially with human sacriﬁces performed in connection with the captive enemy. Just as we ﬁnd a personiﬁcation of death in the manuscripts of the Mayas, we also ﬁnd it in the picture-writings of the ancient Mexicans, often surprisingly like the pictures of the Maya codices. The Aztec death-god and his myth are known through the accounts of Spanish writers; regarding the death-god of the Mayas we have less accurate information. Some mention occurs in Landa’s Relacion de las cosas de Yucatan, §XXIII, but unfortunately nothing is said of the manner of representing the death-god. He seems to be related to the Aztec Mictlantecutli, of whom Sahagun, Appendix to Book III, “De los que iban al inﬁerno y de sus obsequias,” treats as the god of the dead and of the underworld, Mictlan. When the representations of the latter, for example in the Codex Borgia, and in the Codex Vaticanus No. 3773, are compared with those of the Maya manuscripts, there can be hardly a doubt of the correspondence of the two god ﬁgures. In the Codex Borgia, p. 37, he is represented once with the same characteristic head ornament, which the death-god usually wears in the Maya manuscripts, and in the Codex Fejervary, p. 8, the death-god wears a kind of breeches on which cross-bones are depicted, exactly as in Dr. 9 (bottom). Bishop Landa informs us that the Mayas “had great and immoderate dread of death.” This explains the frequency of the representations of the death-god, from whom, as Landa states, “all evil and especially death” emanated. Among the Aztecs we ﬁnd a male and a female death-deity, Mictlantecutli and Mictlancihuatl. They were the rulers of the realm of the dead, Mictlan, which, according to the Aztec conception, lay in the north; hence the death-god was at the same time the god of the north. It agrees with the calendric and astronomic character of the Maya deities in the manuscripts, that a number of the ﬁgures of the gods are used in connection with speciﬁed cardinal points. Since, according to the Aztec conception, the death-god was the god of the north, we might expect that in the Maya manuscripts also, the OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. death-god would be always considered as the deity of the north. Nevertheless this happens only once, namely in the picture at the end of Codex Cort., pp. 41 and 42. Elsewhere, on the other hand, this god is connected with other cardinal points, thus Dr. 14a with the west or east (the hieroglyph is illegible, but it can be only west or east), and in Dr. 27c with the west. It is interesting to note that once, however, in a series of cardinal points, the hieroglyph of the death-god connected with the numeral 10 stands just in the place of the sign of the north; this is on Tro. 24* (bottom). In regard to the name of the death-god in the Maya language, Landa tells us that the wicked after death were banished to an underworld, the name of which was “Mitnal”, a word which is deﬁned as “Hell” in the Maya lexicon of Pio Perez and which has a striking resemblance to Mictlan, the Aztec name for the lower regions. The death-god Hunhau reigned in this underworld. According to other accounts (Hernandez), however, the death-god is called Ahpuch. These names can in no wise serve as aids to the explanation of the hieroglyphs of the death-god, since they have no etymologic connection with death or the heads of corpses and skulls, which form the main parts of the hieroglyph. Furthermore, the hieroglyphs of the gods certainly have a purely ideographic signiﬁcance as already mentioned above, so that any relation between the names of the deities and their hieroglyphs cannot exist from the very nature of the case. The day of the death-god is the day Cimi, death. The day-sign Cimi corresponds almost perfectly with the heads of corpses contained in the hieroglyphs of the death-god. A hieroglyphic sign, which relates to death and the death-deity and occurs very frequently, is the sign Fig. 5, which is probably to be regarded as the ideogram of the owl. It represents the head of an owl, while the ﬁgure in front of it signiﬁes the owl’s ear and the one below, its teeth, as distinguishing marks of a bird of prey furnished with ears and a powerful beak. The head of the owl appears on a human body several times in the Dresden manuscript as a substitute for the death-deity, thus Dr. 18c, 19c, 20a, and 20c and in other places, and the hieroglyphic group (Fig. 5) is almost a regular attendant hieroglyph of the death-god. A series of other ﬁgures of the Maya mythology is connected with the death-god. This is evident from the fact that his hieroglyphs or his symbols occur with certain other ﬁgures, which are thus brought into connection with death and the death-deity. These ﬁgures are as follows: 1. His companion, god F, the god of war, of human sacriﬁce and of violent death in battle, apparently a counterpart of the Aztec Xipe, who will be discussed farther on. 2. The moan bird. See beyond under Mythological Animals, No. 1. 3. The dog. See the same, No. 3. 4. A human ﬁgure, possibly representing the priest of the death.god (see Dr. 28, centre, Dr. 5b and 9a). The last ﬁgure is a little doubtful. It is blindfolded and thus recalls the Aztec deity of frost and sin, Itztlacoliuhqui. A similar form with eyes bound occurs only once again in the Maya manuscripts, namely Dr. 50 (centre). That this ﬁgure is related to the death-god is proved by the fact that on Dr. 9a it wears the Cimi-sign on the middle piece of the chain around its neck. Furthermore it should be emphasized that the Aztec sin-god, Itztlacoliuhqui, likewise appears with symbols of death. 5. An isolated ﬁgure, Dr. 50a (the sitting ﬁgure at the right). This wears the skull as head ornament, which is represented in exactly the same way as in the Aztec manuscripts (see Fig. 6). 6. Another isolated ﬁgure is twice represented combined with the death-god in Dr. 22c. This picture is so effaced that it is impossible to tell what it means. The hieroglyph represents a variant of the death’s-head, Cimi. It seems to signify an ape, which also in the pictures of the Mexican codices was sometimes used in relation to the death-god. The symbols of the death-god are also found with the ﬁgure without a head on Dr. 2 (45)a, clearly the picture of a beheaded prisoner. Death symbols occur, too, with the curious picture of a hanged woman on Dr. 53b, a picture which is interesting from the fact that it recalls vividly a communication of Bishop Landa. OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. Landa tells us, the Mayas believed that whoever hanged himself did not go to the underworld, but to “paradise,” and as a result of this belief, suicide by hanging was very common and was chosen on the slightest pretext. Such suicides were received in paradise by the goddess of the hanged, Ixtab. Ix is the feminine preﬁx; tab, taab, tabil mean, according to Perez’ Lexicon of the Maya Language, “cuerda destinada para algun uso exclusivo”. The name of this strange goddess is, therefore, the “Goddess of the Halter” or, as Landa says, “The Goddess of the Gallows”. Now compare Dr. 53. On the upper half of the page is the death-god represented with hand raised threateningly, on the lower half is seen the form of a woman suspended by a rope placed around her neck. The closed eye, the open mouth and the convulsively outspread ﬁngers, show that she is dead, in fact, strangled. It is, in all probability, the goddess of the gallows and halter, Ixtab, the patroness of the hanged, who is pictured here in company with the death-god; or else it is a victim of this goddess, and page 53 of the manuscript very probably refers, therefore (even though the two halves do not belong directly together), to the mythologic conceptions of death and the lower regions to which Landa alludes. 7. Lastly the owl is to be mentioned as belonging to the death.god, which, strange to say, is represented nowhere in the pictures realistically and so that it can be recognized, although other mythologic animals, as the dog or the moan bird, occur plainly as animals in the pictures. On the other hand, the owl’s head appears on a human body in the Dresden manuscript as a substitute for the death-deity itself, for example on Dr. 18c, 19c, 20a and 20c and elsewhere, and forms a regular attendant hieroglyph of the death.god in the group of three signs already mentioned (Fig. 5). Among the antiquities from the Maya region of Central America, there are many objects and representations, which have reference to the cultus of the death-god, and show resemblances to the pictures of the manuscripts. The death-god also plays a role, even today, in the popular superstitions of the natives of Yucatan, as a kind of spectre that prowls around the houses of the sick. His name is Yum Cimil, the lord of death. B. The God With the Large Nose and Lolling Tongue. The deity, represented most frequently in all the manuscripts, is a ﬁgure with a long, proboscis-like, pendent nose and a tongue (or teeth, fangs) hanging out in front and at the sides of the mouth, also with a characteristic head ornament resembling a knotted bow and with a peculiar rim to the eye. Fig. 7 is the hieroglyph of this deity. In Codex Tro.-Cortesianus it usually has the form of Fig. 8. God B is evidently one of the most important of the Maya pantheon. He must be a universal deity, to whom the most varied elements, natural phenomena and activities are subject. He is represented with different attributes and symbols of power, with torches in his hands as symbols of ﬁre, sitting in the water and on the water, standing in the rain, riding in a canoe, enthroned on the clouds of heaven and on the cross-shaped tree of the four points of the compass, which, on account of its likeness to the Christian emblem, has many times been the subject of fantastic hypotheses. We see the god again on the Cab-sign, the symbol of the earth, with weapons, axe and spears, in his hands, planting kernels of maize, on a journey (Dr. 65b) staff in hand and a bundle on his back, and fettered (Dr. 37a) with arms bound behind his back. His entire myth seems to be recorded in the manuscripts. The great abundance of symbolism renders difﬁcult the characterization of the deity, and it is well-nigh impossible to discover that a single mythologic idea underlies the whole. God B is quite often connected with the serpent, without exhibiting afﬁnity with the Chicchan-god H (see p. 28). In Dr. 33b, 34b and 35b, the serpent is in the act of devouring him, or he is rising up out of the serpent’s jaws, as is plainly indicated also by the hieroglyphs, for they contain the group given in Fig. 10, which is composed of the rattle of the rattlesnake and the opened hand as a symbol of seizing and absorption. God B himself is pictured with the body of a serpent in Dr. 35b and 36a (compare No. 2 of the Mythological Animals). OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. He likewise occurs sitting on the serpent and in Dr. 66a he is twice (1st and 3d ﬁgures) pictured with a snake in his hand. God B sits on the moan head in Dr. 38c, on a head with the Cauac-sign in Dr. 39c, 66c, and on the dog in Dr. 29a. All these pictures are meant to typify his abode in the air, above rain, storm and death-bringing clouds, from which the lightning falls. The object with the cross-bones of the death-god, on which he sits in Dr. 66c, can perhaps be explained in the same manner. As the ﬁsh belongs to god B in a symbolic sense, so the god is represented ﬁshing in Dr. 44 (1). His face with the large nose and the tongue (or fangs) hanging out on the side in Dr. 44 (1)a (1st ﬁgure) is supposed to be a mask which the priest, representing the god, assumes during the religious ceremony. Furthermore the following four well-known symbols of sacri.ﬁcial gifts appear in connection with god B in the Dresden manu.script: a sprouting kernel of maize (or, according to Förstemann, parts of a mammal, game), a ﬁsh, a lizard and a vulture’s head, as symbols of the four elements. They seem to occur, however, in relation also to other deities and evidently are general symbols of sacriﬁcial gifts. Thus they occur on the two companion initial pages of the Codex Tro.-Cortesianus, on which the hieroglyphs of gods C and K are repeated in rows (Tro. 36–Cort. 22. Compare Förstemann, Kommentar zur Madrider Handschrift, pp. 102, 103). God B is also connected with the four colors — yellow, red, white, and black — which, according to the conception of the Mayas, correspond to the cardinal points (yellow, air; red, ﬁre; white, water; black, earth) and the god himself is occasionally represented with a black body, for example on Dr. 29c, 31c and 69. This is expressed in the hieroglyphs by the sign, Fig. 9, which signiﬁes black and is one of the four signs of the symbolic colors for the cardinal points. God B is represented with all the four cardinal points, a characteristic, which he shares only with god C, god K, and, in one instance, with god F (see Tro. 29*c); he appears as ruler of all the points of the compass: north, south, east and west as well as air, ﬁre, water and earth are subject to him. Opinions concerning the signiﬁcance of this deity are much divided. It is most probable that he is Kukulcan, a ﬁgure occurring repeatedly in the mythology of the Central American peoples and whose name, like that of the kindred deity Quetzalcoatl among the Aztecs and Gucumatz among the Quiches, means the “feathered serpent”, “the bird serpent”. Kukulcan and Gucumatz are those ﬁgures of Central American mythology, to which belong the legends of the creation of the world and of mankind. Furthermore Kukulcan is considered as the founder of civilization, as the builder of cities, as hero-god, and appears in another conception as the rain-deity, and — since the serpent has a mythologic relation to water — as serpent deity. J. Walter Fewkes, who has made this god-ﬁgure of the Maya manuscripts the subject of a monograph (A Study of Certain Figures in a Maya Codex, in American Anthropologist, Vol. VII, No. 3, Washington, 1894), also inclines to the belief that B is the god Kukulcan, whom he conceives of as a serpent-and-rain-deity. This view has been accepted by Förstemann (Die Tagegötter der Mayas, Globus, Vol. 73, No. 10) and also by Cyrus Thomas (Aids to the Study of the Maya Codices, Washington, 1888). The same opinion is held also by E. P. Dieseldorff, who, a resident of Guatemala, the region of the ancient Maya civilization, has instituted excavations which have been successful in furnishing most satisfactory material for these researches (see Dieseldorff: Kukulcan, Zeitschrift für Ethnologie, 1895, p. 780). Others have considered god B as the ﬁrst parent and lord of the heavens, Itzamná who has a mythologic importance analogous to that of Kukulcan. Itzamná is also held to be the god of creation and founder of civilization and accordingly seems to be not very remotely allied to the god Kukulcan. Others again, for example Brasseur de Bourbourg and Seler, have interpreted the ﬁgure of god B to represent the fourfold god of the cardinal points and rain-god Chac, a counterpart of the Aztec rain-god Tlaloc. The fact that this god-ﬁgure is so frequently connected with the serpent and the bird is strongly in favor of the correctness of the supposition, that we should see in god B a ﬁgure corresponding to the Kukulcan of tradition. Thus we see the god represented once with the body of a serpent and with a bird near by (Cort. 10b), while B’s hieroglyph appears both times in the text. God B is also pictured elsewhere repeatedly with a serpent body, thus for OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. example on Dr. 35b, 36a. On pages 4-6 of the Codex Cortesianus he is pictured six times and each time in connection with a serpent. The accounts we have received concerning the mythology of the Maya peoples are very meagre and owing to the uncertainty respecting the origin of the Maya manuscripts, it cannot even be determined which of these accounts are applicable to the Maya manuscripts, or, indeed, whether they are applicable at all. For it is by no means positively proved that these manuscripts did not originate in regions of Maya culture, regarding which we have received no accounts at all. As our present purpose is purely that of description and determination, it remains quite unimportant which of these recorded ﬁgures of gods shall be regarded as god B. God B is nearly allied to, but in no wise identical with, the deity with the large ornamented nose, designated by K, who will be discussed farther on. God K is an independent deity designated by a special hieroglyph, but like C he stands in an unknown relation to God B (for details see K). Finally it should be mentioned, that god B never appears with death symbols. He is clearly a deity of life and creation, in contrast to the powers of death and destruction. His day seems to be Ik (aspiration, breath, life). (Compare Förstemann, Die Tagegötter der Mayas, Globus, Vol. 73, No. 10). C. The God with the Ornamented Face. This is one of the most remarkable and most difﬁcult ﬁgures of the Maya manuscripts, and shows, at the same time, how imperfect must be the information we have received in regard to the Maya mythology, since from the frequency of his representations he is obviously one of the most important deities and yet can be identiﬁed with none of the representations of gods handed down to us. His hieroglyph is deﬁnitely determined (Figs. 11, 12). The circular design in front of the forehead of the hieroglyph head seems, as a variant from the Codex Tro. (Fig. 12) leads us to suppose, to denote the ideographic representation of pouring out or emptying a vessel, the contents of which ﬂow into the mouth of the god. Another variant of this preﬁx occurs in Tro. 13*b; Fig. 15, the symbol of the sacriﬁcial knife, and instead of the preﬁx the numeral 13 occurs in one instance! (Tro. 12*c). The head alone, without any accessory symbol whatever, is also found a few times, not in the text, however, but only in the pictures, for example Cort. 10 (bottom) and Tro. 13* (bottom). This deity does not occur very often in the Dresden manuscript, the places where it is depicted are: Dr. 5a, 6c, 13b, 35a, 68a, and as a subordinate ﬁgure on 8c, 42a. His hieroglyph occurs alone a few times, as in Dr. 4; it is more frequent in the Madrid manuscript. It appears on pp. 15 to 18 of the Paris manuscript. In regard to the signiﬁcance of this deity, he doubtless represents the personiﬁcation of a heavenly body of astronomic importance, probably the polar star. In Codex Cort. 10 (bottom), his head is represented surrounded by a nimbus of rays, which can only mean a star (see Fig. 13). On the lower part of the same page, the third picture from the left, we again see the deity hanging from the sky in a kind of rope. Furthermore it appears in Codex Tro. 20, 22 and 23 (centre) Fig. 14, in the familiar rectangular planet signs. Tro. 17* (at the top) the head surmounts the cross-shaped tree of god B, which denotes the lofty, celestial abode. Indeed, these passages prove positively that a heavenly body underlies the idea of this deity. Furthermore, the head of this god recurs in entire rows in the calendric group of tabular form on the so-called initial page of the Codex Tro. 36, with its continuation in the Cort. p. 22, and in exactly the same manner in the allied passage of Tro. 14 (middle and bottom). In addition, his head is contained in the symbol for the north (Fig. 16); the head contained in this sign is in fact nothing else than the head of god C. Brinton also accepts this interpretation of god C. According to Förstemann (Die Mayahieroglyphen, Globus, Vol. 71, No. 5), the OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. fact that the ﬁgure of god C in the Tonalamatl in Dr. 4a-10a occurs on the day Chuen of the Maya calendar, which corresponds to the day Ozomatli, the ape, in the Aztec calendar, seems to indicate that the singular head of C is that of an ape, whose lateral nasal cavity (peculiar to the American ape or monkey) is occasionally represented plainly in the hieroglyph picture. Hence it might further be assumed that god C symbolizes not the polar star alone, but rather the entire constellation of the Little Bear. And, in fact, the ﬁgure of a long-tailed ape is quite appropriate to the constellation, at any rate decidedly more so than the Bear; indeed, it suggests the prehensile tail by means of which the ape could attach himself to the pole and in the form of the constellation swing around the pole as around a ﬁxed point. These astronomical surmises seem to be contradicted by the fact that god C, as already stated, is represented with all the four cardinal points (compare for example Cort. 10 and 11, bottom), which would certainly seem to harmonize ill with his personiﬁcation of the north star, unless we assume, that in a different conception of the polar star he is ruler of the cardinal points, which are determined from him as a centre. It has already been remarked of B, that the deity C appears to stand in some sort of relation to him. In fact, we ﬁnd on those pages of the Dresden manuscript, where B is represented with the four cardinal points, that the hieroglyph of C almost always occurs in the text also (for example Dr. 29, et seq., especially Dr. 32c). Indeed, C’s hieroglyph is connected even with the signs of the symbolic colors of the cardinal points, already mentioned in connection with B. Finally, it should be borne in mind, that god C also seems to be connected in some way with the serpent (compare Dr. 36b, 1st and 3d pictures). According to Förstemann, the day ruled by C seems to be Chuen. D. The Moon- and Night-God. This is a deity who is pictured in the form of an old man with an aged face and sunken, toothless mouth. He is frequently characterized by a long, pendent head ornament, in which is the sign Akbal, darkness, night, which also appears in his hieroglyph before the forehead of the deity, surrounded by dots as an indication of the starry sky. His name-hieroglyph is Fig. 17, and a second sign almost always follows (Fig. 18) which evidently serves likewise as a designation of the god, just as god A also is always designated by two hieroglyphs. The second sign consists of two sacriﬁcial knives and the sign of the day Ahau, which is equivalent to “king”. The head of this deity appears in reduced, cursive form as the sign of the moon (Fig. 20). This character also has the signiﬁcance of 20 as a number sign in the calendar. The association of these ideas probably rests upon the ancient conceptions, according to which the moon appearing, waxing, waning and again disappearing, was compared to man, and man in primeval ages was the most primitive calculating machine, being equivalent, from the sum of his ﬁngers and toes, to the number 20. Twenty days is also the duration of that period during which the moon (aside from the new moon) is really alive. Moreover the sign (Fig. 20) appears in many places as a counterpart of the sign for the sun. God D occurs once as feminine in the same passage mentioned above, in which the death-deity is also pictured as feminine (Dr. 9c). In a few other places the god is, curiously enough, depicted with a short beard, as Dr. 4c, 7a, 27b. He seems to stand in an unknown relation to the water-goddess I (see this deity) with the serpent as a head ornament, compare Dr. 9c, where apparently this goddess is represented, though the text has D’s sign; still it is possible that god D is pictured here with the attributes of goddess I. OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. God D is not connected with the grim powers of destruction; he never appears with death symbols. In Dr. 5c and 9a he wears the snail on his head. Re seems, therefore, like god A to be connected with birth. In Dr. 8c he is connected with god C, and this is quite appropriate, if we look upon these gods as heavenly bodies. The aged face, the sunken, toothless mouth are his distinguishing marks. In the Madrid manuscript, where god D occurs with special frequency, his chief characteristic, by which he is always easily recognized, is the single tooth in his under-jaw (see Fig. 19), compare too Dr. 8c, where the solitary tooth is also to be seen. In Dr. 9a (1st ﬁgure) the god holds in his hand a kind of sprinkler with the rattles of the rattlesnake, as Landa (Cap. 26) describes the god in connection with the rite of infant baptism (see also Cort. 26, Tro. 7*a and 13*c). A very remarkable passage is Tro. 15*; there a ﬁgure is pictured carving with a hatchet a head, which it holds in its hand. Above it are four hieroglyphs. The ﬁrst shows a hatchet and the moon; the second probably represents simply a head, while the third and fourth are those of god D, the moon-god. This passage, the meaning of which is unfortunately still obscure seems to contain a deﬁnite explanation of god D. J. Walter Fewkes has made god D the subject of a special, very detailed monograph (The God “D” in the Codex Cortesianus, Washington, 1895) in which he has treated also of gods B and G, whom he considers allied to D. He believes D to be the god Itzamná, as do also Förstemann, Cyrus Thomas and Seler, and sees sun-gods in all three of these deities. Whether god D is to be separated from G and B as an independent deity, Fewkes thinks is doubtful. Brinton again holds that god D is Kukulcan. These different opinions show, at all events, on what uncertain grounds such attempts at interpretation stand, and that it is best to be satisﬁed with designating the deities by letters and collecting material for their purely descriptive designation. According to Förstemann the calendar day devoted to D is Ahau. E. The Maize-God. This god bears on his head the Kan-sign and above it the ear of maize with leaves (Fig. 23); compare Dr. 9b (left ﬁgure), 11b, 12a, etc. The hieroglyph is deﬁnitely determined (Fig. 21). The god is identical with the ﬁgures recurring with especial frequency in the Madrid manuscript, the heads of which are prolonged upward and curved backward in a peculiar manner; compare Cort. 15a, 20c, 40 (bottom), Tro. 32*b (Figs. 25-27) and especially the representation in Dr. 50a (Fig. 24), which is very distinct. This head was evolved out of the conventional drawing of the ear of maize; compare the pictures of the maize plant in the Codex Tro., p. 29b (Fig. 22) with the head ornament of the god in Dr. 9b (Fig. 23), 9a, 12a; what was originally a head ornament ﬁnally passed into the form of the head itself, so that the latter appears now as an ear of maize surrounded by leaves. Compare the pictures, Figs. 25-27. That these gods with elongated heads are, in point of fact, identical with E is plainly seen from the passage in Dr. 2 (45)c (ﬁrst ﬁgure). There the ﬁgure represented, which is exactly like the pictures in the Madrid manuscript, is designated explicitly as god E by the third hieroglyph in the accompanying writing. The hieroglyph of this deity is thus explained; it is the head of the god merged into the conventionalized form of the ear of maize surrounded by leaves. When we remember that the Maya nations practised the custom of artiﬁcially deforming the skull, as is seen in particular on the reliefs at Palenque, we may also regard the heads of these deities as representations of such artiﬁcially ﬂattened skulls. God E occurs frequently as the god of husbandry, especially in the Madrid manuscript, which devotes much attention to agriculture, lie seems to be a counterpart of the Mexican maize.god Centeotl. The passages in the Madrid manuscript (Tro. 29a OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. and Cort. 39a, 40a) are very remarkable, where the deity E is represented in the position of a woman in labor with numerals on the abdomen; perhaps the underlying idea is that of fruitfulness. In the Codex Cort., p. 40, this grain-deity is pictured with a tall and slender vessel before him, which he holds in his hands. It is possible that this is meant to suggest a grain receptacle; to be sure, in the same place, other ﬁgures of gods likewise have such vessels in their hands. At any rate, it is interesting to note that in the passage already mentioned (Dr. 50a) god E also holds a similar tall and slender vessel in his hands. According to all appearances the scene pictured in Dr. 50a has reference to the conﬂict of the grain-god with a death-deity. The latter, the ﬁgure sitting on the right, is characterized by a skull as a head ornament (see Fig. 6) and seems to address threats or commands to god E, who stands before him in the attitude of a terriﬁed and cowed individual. Furthermore god E has nothing to do with the powers of the underworld; he is a god of life, of prosperity and fruitfulness; symbols of death are never found in connection with him. Brinton calls this god Ghanan, equivalent to Kan; it is possible, too, that he is identical with a deity Yum Kaax who has been handed down to us and whose name means “Lord of the harvest ﬁelds”. According to Förstemann the day dedicated to this god is Kan. F. The God of War and or Human Sacriﬁces. 28-30; it contains the number 11. A variant of this occurs on Dr. 7b, where instead of the 11 there is the following sign: The characteristic mark of god F is a single black line usually running perpendicularly down the face in the vicinity of the eye. This line should be distinguished from the parallel lines of C’s face and from the line, which, as a continuation of god E’s head resembling an ear of maize, frequently appears on his face, especially as in the variants of the Madrid manuscript (compare Figs. 25–27). These pictures of E can always be unfailingly recognized by the peculiar shape of the head and should be distinguished from those representing F. The black face-line is the distinguishing mark of god F, just as it is of the Aztec Xipe. It sometimes runs in a curve over the cheek as a thick, black stripe, as Cort. 42. Sometimes it encircles the eye only (Dr. 6a) and again it is a dotted double line (Dr. 6b). The hieroglyph of god F likewise exhibits this line and with the very same variants as the god himself. See the hieroglyphs of the god belonging to the pictures in Dr. 6a, 1st and 3d ﬁgures, in which the line likewise differs from the other forms (Figs. 30–34). In a few places god F is pictured with the same black lines on his entire body, which elsewhere he has only on his face, the lines being like those in Fig. 31, namely Tro. 27*c. Indeed, in Tro. 28*c, the death-god A likewise has these black lines on his body and also F’s line on his face; a clear proof of the close relationship of the two deities. These lines probably signify gaping death-wounds and the accompanying rows of dots are intended to represent the blood. Since god F is a death-deity the familiar sign (Fig. 5), which occurs so frequently with the hieroglyphs of A, also belongs to his symbols. F is pictured in company with the death-god in connection with human sacriﬁce (Cort. 42); an exactly similar picture of the two gods of human sacriﬁce is given in Codex Tro. 30d; here, too, they sit opposite one another. The identity of this attendant of death with the deity, designated by the hieroglyph with the numeral 11, is proved by the following passages: Tro. OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. 19, bottom (on the extreme right hand without picture, only hieroglyph, see Fig. 29), Dr. 5b, 6a, b, and c and many others. In some of the passages cited (Dr. 5a and b) he is distinguished by an unusually large ear-peg. His hieroglyph occurs with the hieroglyph of the death-god in Dr. 6c, where he is himself not pictured. As war-god, god P occurs combined with the death-god in the passages mentioned above (Tro. 27*-29*c), where he sets the houses on ﬁre with his torch and demolishes them with his spear. God F occurs quite frequently in the manuscripts and must therefore be considered as one of the more important deities. According to Förstemann his day is Manik, the seizing, grasping hand, symbolizing the capturing of an enemy in war for sacriﬁcial purposes. F’s sign occurs once, as mentioned above, in fourfold repetition with all the four cardinal points, namely in Tro. 29*c. In ancient Central America the captured enemy was sacriﬁced and thus the conceptions of the war-god and of the god of death by violence and by human sacriﬁce are united in the ﬁgure of god F. In this character god F occurs several times in the Madrid manuscript in combat with M, the god of travelling merchants (see page 35). Spanish writers do not mention a deity of the kind described here as belonging to the Maya pantheon. G. The Sun-God. God G’s hieroglyph (Fig. 35) contains as its chief factor the sun.sign Kin. It is one of the signs (of which there are about 12 in the manuscripts), which has the Ben-ik preﬁx and doubtless denotes a month dedicated to the sun. There is, I think, no difference of opinion regarding the signiﬁcance of this deity, although Fewkes, as already stated, is inclined to identify G with B, whom, it is true, the former resembles. It is surprising that a deity who from his nature must be considered as very important, is represented with such comparative infrequency. He occurs only a few times in the Dresden manuscript, for example 22b, 11c, and in the Codex Tro.-Cortesianus none can be found among the ﬁgures which could be safely regarded as the sun-god; in no manuscript except the Dresden does a deity occur wearing the sun-sign Kin on his body. But once in the Codex Cort. the ﬁgure of D appears with the sun.sign on his head, as pointed out by Fewkes in his article entitled “The God ‘D’ in the Codex Cortesianus”. G’s hieroglyph, to be sure, is found repeatedly in the Madrid manuscript, for example Codex Tro. 31c. God G seems to be not wholly without relation to the powers of death; the owl-sign (Fig. 5) occurs once in connection with him (Dr. 11c). Besides the sun-sign Kin, which the god bears on his body, his representations are distinguished by a peculiar nose ornament (Fig. 36) which, as may be seen by comparison with other similar pictures in the Dresden manuscript, is nothing but a large and especially elaborate nose-peg. Similar ornaments are rather common just here in the carefully drawn ﬁrst part of the Dresden manuscript. Compare Dr. 22b (middle ﬁgure), 21 (centre), 17b, 14a, b; occasionally they also have the shape of a ﬂower, for example 12b (centre), 11c (left), 19a. Lastly it is worthy of note, that god G is sometimes represented with a snake-like tongue protruding from his mouth, as in Dr. 11b and c. H. The Chicchan-God. The ﬁgure of a deity of frequent occurrence in the Dresden manuscript is a god, who is characterized by a skin-spot or a scale of a serpent on his temple of the same shape as the hieroglyph of the day Chicchan (serpent). Moreover the representations of the god himself differ very much, so that there are almost no other OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. positive, unvarying characteristic marks to be speciﬁed. His picture is plainly recognizable and has the Chicchan-mark on the temple in Dr. 11a, 12b and 20b. The hieroglyph belonging to this deity likewise displays the Chicchan-sign as its distinguishing mark. Furthermore several variants occur. The Chicchan-sign has sometimes the form of Fig. 37 and again that of Fig. 38. The preﬁx likewise differs very much, having sometimes the form of Fig. 37, and again that of Fig. 38 or of Figs. 39 and 40. Thus there are, in all, four different forms of the preﬁx. It is to be assumed that all these hieroglyphs have the same meaning, notwithstanding their variations. Taking into consideration the frequency of the variations of other hieroglyphs of gods and of the hieroglyphs in the Maya manuscripts in general, it is quite improbable from the nature of the case, that a hieroglyph, which displays so great an agreement in its essential and characteristic elements, should denote several different gods. The dissimilarity which Seler thinks he ﬁnds between the forms of the Chicchan-sign in Figs. 37 and 38 and which leads him to assume that Fig. 37 is not a Chicchan-sign at all, but that it denotes another face ornament, cannot be satisfactorily proved, and must be regarded as an arbitrary assumption. The Chicchan-mark in the sign of the day Chicchan also differs very much from that on the bodies of the serpents pictured in the manuscripts, so that variations of this kind by no means make it necessary to assume that the hieroglyphs actually denote different things. Observe, for example, the different Chicchan-spots on the serpent’s body in Tro. 27a. The crenelated, black border of the Chicchan-spot in Fig. 38 passes in rapid cursive drawing almost of itself into the scallops of Fig. 37, a transition to which there are distinct tendencies on the serpent’s body in Tro. 27a. Nor does the fact, that under H’s hieroglyph different personages are very often pictured, whom we cannot positively identify, compel the assumption that we have here not one, but two or more mythical ﬁgures, for the same is true of other hieroglyphs of gods. There are many places in the manuscripts where the text contains a deﬁnite well-known hieroglyph of a god, while the accompanying picture represents some other deity or some other ﬁgure not deﬁnitely characterized, perhaps merely a human form (priest, warrior, woman and the like). Thus in Dr. 4a we see H’s hieroglyph in the text, but the picture is the ﬁgure of god P while in other places we miss the characteristic Chicchan-spot on the ﬁgure represented, for example Dr. 4c, 6a, 7b, 7c, 14a, 2lc. In the Madrid manuscript, it is true, H’s hieroglyph also occurs often enough, but not in a single instance is a deity represented displaying the Chicchan-spot. This fact is, I think, to be explained by the coarser style of the drawing, which does not admit of representing such ﬁne details as in the Dresden manuscript. In the Paris manuscript H’s hieroglyph occurs but once (p. 8, bottom). Seler thinks he recognizes in some of the ﬁgures represented under H’s hieroglyph in the manuscripts, a so-called “young god”. Such a deity is unknown and the assumption is entirely arbitrary. Apparently this “young god” is an invention of Brinton. The purely inductive and descriptive study of the manuscripts does not prove the existence of such a personage, and we must decline to admit him as the result of deductive reasoning. In this so-called “young god”, we miss, ﬁrst of all, a characteristic mark, a distinct peculiarity such as belongs to all the ﬁgures of gods in the manuscripts without exception and by which he could be recognized. Except his so-called youthfulness, however, no such deﬁnite marks are to be found. Furthermore there is no ﬁgure of a god in the manuscripts which would not be designated by a deﬁnite characteristic hieroglyph. No such hieroglyph can be proved as belonging to the “young god”. The ﬁgures, which are supposed to have a “youthful appearance” in the Madrid manuscript, often convey this impression merely in consequence of their smallness and of the pitiful, squatting attitude in which they are represented. Furthermore real children do occur here and there, thus, for example, in the Dresden manuscript in connection with the pictures of women in the ﬁrst part and in Tro. 2O*c in the representation of the so-called “infant baptism.” That god H has some relation to the serpent must be conjectured from what has been said. Thus, for example, on Dr. 15b, we see his hieroglyph belonging to the ﬁgure of a woman with the knotted serpent on her head, in Dr. 4a to the god F, who there bears a serpent in his hand, and in Dr. 35b in connection with a serpent with B’s head. What this relation is, cannot now be stated. OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. The day dedicated to god H is Chicchan, and the sign for this day is his distinguishing hieroglyph. I. The Water-Goddess. In the Dresden manuscript the ﬁgure of an old woman, with the body stained brown and claws in place of feet, occurs repeatedly. She wears on her head a knotted serpent and with her hands pours water from a vessel. Evidently we have here a personiﬁcation of water in its quality of destroyer, a goddess of ﬂoods and cloud.bursts, which, as we know, play an important part in Central America. Page 27, of the Codex Troano contains a picture, in which this character of goddess I may be distinctly recognized. In accordance with this character also on Dr. 74, where something resembling a ﬂood is represented, she wears the cross-bones of the death-god. The goddess is pictured in the manner described in the following places: Dr. 39b, 43b, 67a and 74. The ﬁgure corresponding to her in the Madrid manuscript, in Tro. 27 and 34*c, displays some variations, in particular the tiger claws on the feet and the red.brown color of the body are lacking. But the agreement cannot be questioned, I think, when we recall that the Maya manuscripts doubtless originated in different ages and different areas of civilization, circumstances which readily explain such variations. The goddess distinguished in the Madrid manuscript by symbols of ﬂood and water is doubtless the same as goddess I of the Dresden manuscript described above; her unmistakable character of water-goddess in both manuscripts is in favor of this. In both manuscripts she is invariably distinguished by the serpent on her head, which, as we know, is a symbol of the water ﬂowing along and forming waves. Strange to say, a ﬁxed hieroglyph of this goddess cannot be proved with certainty. There is some probability in favor of the sign given in Fig. 41. The well-known oblong signs, which Förstemann (Drei Mayahieroglyphen, published in the Zeitschrift für Ethnologie, 1901, pp. 215–221) interprets as the sign for evil days, frequently occur with her. This would be appropriate for the goddess of ﬂoods. In the Dresden manuscript a few similar ﬁgures of women are found, who, like goddess I, wear a knotted serpent on the head. Representations of this kind occur in Dr. 9c, 15b, 18a. 20a, 22b and 23b. Whether they are identical with goddess I is doubtful, since there is no symbolic reference to water in these passages. Besides, the hieroglyphs of other known deities occur each time in the above-mentioned places, so that deﬁnite mythologic relations must be assumed to exist here between the women represented and the deities in question. Thus in Dr. 9c we ﬁnd D’s sign, in 15b that of H; on 18a, 22b and 23b we see only the general sign for a woman. In Dr. 20a the signs are effaced. In the Codex Troano goddess I occurs on pp. 25b and 27; there is also a woman with the knotted serpent on her head in Tro. 34*c. In the Codex Cortesianus and in the Paris manuscript these forms are wholly lacking. K. The God with the Ornamented Nose. This god, as already mentioned in connection with B, is not identical with the latter, but is probably closely related to him. His hieroglyph is Fig. 42; Fig. 43 is the form in the Madrid manuscript, lie is closely related to god B. He is represented in Dr. 25 (centre) where he is perhaps conceived of as a priest wearing a mask with the face of the god, also in Dr. 7a, 12a (with his own hieroglyph and that of E!), 26 (bottom) with a variant of the sign. His ﬁgure without the hieroglyph occurs in Dr. 3. Very frequently the well-known group, 3 Oc, is given with him and in connection with his hieroglyph (in Dr. 3, 7a, 10b (right); without picture, 12a). Förstemann (Drei Maya-hieroglyphen, Zeitschrift OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. für Ethnologie, 1901, pp. 215–221) sees in this the sign for good days, a proof that we have to do here with a benevolent deity well disposed to mankind, his kinship with B being also in favor of this interpretation. His hieroglyph alone without his picture occurs in Dr. 10b, 49 (middle and bottom), 58 (bottom, left), and Tro. 8*b; with a variant of the attribute in Dr. 24 (third vertical row). A slight variation appears also in Dr. 69 (top, right). In Dr. 65a (middle) B is pictured. But in the text we see K’s hieroglyph presented by a hand. The next ﬁgure on the same page at the right represents god B with the head of K on his own and the same head once more in his hand. Agreeing with this, we ﬁnd in the accompanying text the signs of B and K, the latter in a hand. K seems to be pictured again in Dr. 46 (bottom); the passage, however, is somewhat obliterated. The hieroglyph is lacking in this place; it is found, however, on the preceding page 45 (middle). In addition to the passage already mentioned, which represents god K together with B, such double deities again occur in the Paris manuscript, p. 13, where B holds K’s head in his hand; in Dr. 34b, where he carries this head on his own and in Dr. 67a where he appears to carry it in a rope. Once, however, a variation of these plainly synonymous representations occurs, namely in Dr. 49 (at the top), where we see a feminine form above whose head rises the head of god K. In the Paris manuscript, so far as its defaced condition permits us to recognize the representation, K occurs very frequently, as for example, in Per. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 9 (in part only his head is given, presented by god B, as in the Dresden manuscript). Brinton considers this ﬁgure simply as a special manifestation of B and identical with that god. Förstemann thinks that god K is a storm-deity, whose ornamental nose, according to the conventional mode of drawing of the Central American peoples, is intended to represent the blast of the storm. Apparently, however, the deity has an astronomic signiﬁcance and seems to symbolize a star. In favor of this is the fact, that on the so-called initial pages of the Madrid manuscript (Cort. 22– Tro. 36) a row, composed of repetitions of his sign, occurs below the signs of the cardinal points and parallel to a row composed of signs of god C, the god of the polar star and the north. The hieroglyphs of C and K are the only hieroglyphs of gods, which are repeated 13 times on these pages with the 13 days enumerated there. The two gods must, therefore, have either a parallel or an opposite astronomic and calendric meaning. The fact that in Dr. 25 and 26 K appears as regent of the year, is an argument in favor of his astronomic signiﬁcance. According to Förstemann, Muluc is the day dedicated to god K. In the head of god K we recognize the ornament so common in the temple ruins of Central America – the so-called “elephant’s trunk.” The peculiar, conventionalized face, with the projecting proboscis-shaped nose, which is applied chieﬂy to the corners of temple walls, displays unquestionably the features of god K. The signiﬁcance of god K in this architectural relation is unknown. Some connection with his character as the deity of a star and with his astronomic qualities may, however, be assumed, since, as we know, the temple structures of Central America are always placed with reference to the cardinal points. L. The Old, Black God. God L’s features are those of an old man with sunken, toothless mouth. His hieroglyph is Fig. 44, which is characterized by the black face. God L, who is also black, must not be confounded with M whose description follows. L is represented and designated by his hieroglyph in the accompanying text, in Dr. 14b and 14c and Dr. 46b; the ﬁgure has the characteristic black face. He appears entirely black in Dr. 7a. The hieroglyph alone occurs in Dr. 21b and 24 (third vertical line in the ﬁrst passage) with a variation, namely without the Ymix-sign before the head. This deity does not occur in the Madrid and Paris manuscripts. OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. The signiﬁcance of god L does not appear from the few pictures, which are given of him. In Dr. 46b the god is pictured armed and in warlike attitude. Both in Dr. 14b and 14c he wears a bird on his head and has a Kan in his hand. According to Förstemann, his day is Akbal, darkness, night. Cyrus Thomas (Aids to the Study of the Maya Codices, in the 6th Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, Washington, 1888, p. 358) thinks he is the god Ekchuah, who has come down to us as a black deity. God M seems, however, to correspond to Ekchuah (see the description of M). M. The Black God with the Red Lips. God M’s hieroglyph is Figs. 45, 46; it seems to represent an eye rimmed with black, though the ﬁgure of the god himself displays an entirely different drawing of the eye (see Fig. 47). The god is found in the Dresden manuscript only three times, namely in Dr. 16b (with a bone in his hand) in picture and sign, in Dr. 13c grouped with an animal, without the hieroglyph, and in Dr. 43a (with his sign) while ﬁnally his hieroglyph alone appears in Dr. 56 (top, left) in a group and of a somewhat different form. On the other hand, god M appears with special frequency in the Madrid manuscript, which treats of this deity with great fullness of detail. While he is represented in the Dresden manuscript (16b) with his body striped black and white, and on p. 43a entirely white, he is always entirely black in the Codex Troano. His other distinguishing marks are the following: 1. The mouth encircled by a red-brown border. 2. The large, drooping under lip. By this he can be recognized with certainty also in Dr. 43a. 3. The two curved lines at the right of the eye. His signiﬁcance can be conjectured. He seems to be of a war-like nature, for he is almost always represented armed with the lance and also as engaged in combat and, in some instances, pierced by the lance of his opponent, god F, for example in Tro. 3c, 7a, 29*a. The peculiar object with parallel stripes, which he wears on his head is a rope from which a package frequently hangs. By means of a rope placed around his head the god frequently carries a bale of merchandise, as is the custom today among the aborigines in different parts of America. On 4b and 5a in the Cod. Tro. this can plainly be seen. All these pictures lead us to conclude, that we have here to do with a god of travelling merchants. A deity of this character called Ekchuah has been handed down to us, who is designated explicitly as a black god. In favor of this is also the fact, that he is represented ﬁghting with F and pierced by the latter. For the travelling merchant must, of course, be armed to ward off hostile attacks and these are admirably symbolized by god F, for he is the god of death in war and of the killing of the captured enemy. The god is found in the Codex Troano in the following places and on many pages two or three times: pp. 2, 3, 4, 5, always with the hieroglyph, then without it on pp. 6, 7, 19, 4*c, l4*b, 17*a, 18*b and again with the hieroglyph on pp. 22*a, 23*a, 25*a; ﬁnally it is found again without the hieroglyph on pp. 29*a, 30*a, 31*, 32*, 33*, 34*. In the Codex Cortesianus god M occurs in the following places: p. 15, where he strikes the sky with the axe and thus causes rain, p. 19 (bottom), 28 (bottom, second ﬁgure), 34 (bottom) and 36 (top). M is always to be recognized by the encircled mouth and the drooping under-lip; ﬁgures without these marks are not identical with M, thus for example in Tro. 23, 24, 25, 21*. Tro. 34*a shows what is apparently a variant of M with the face of an old man, the scorpion’s tail and the vertebrae of the death-god, a ﬁgure which in its turn bears on its breast the plainly recognizable head of M. God M is also represented elsewhere many times with the scorpion’s tail, thus for example on Tro. 30*a, 31*a. Besides his hieroglyph mentioned above, Figs. 45 and 46, another sign seems to refer to god M, namely Fig. 48 (compare for example Tro. 5a and Cort. 28, bottom). The head in this sign has the same curved lines at the corner of the eye as appear on the OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. deity himself. Förstemann mentions this sign in his Commentary on the Paris Manuscript, p. 15, and in his Commentary on the Dresden Manuscript, p. 56. He thinks the hieroglyph has relation to the revolution of Venus, which is performed in 584 days. A relation of this kind is, I think, very possible, if we bear in mind that all the god-ﬁgures of the manuscripts have more or less of a calendric and chronologic signiﬁcance in their chief or in their secondary function. It should be mentioned that God M is represented as a rule as an old man with toothless jaw or the characteristic solitary tooth. That he is also related to bee-culture is shown by his presence on p. 4*c of the Codex Troano, in the section on bees. Besides gods L and M, a few quite isolated black ﬁgures occur in the Codex Troano, who, apparently, are identical with neither of these two deities, but are evidently of slight importance and perhaps are only variants of other deities. Similar ﬁgures of black deities are found in the Codex Tro. 23, 24 and 25 (perhaps this is a black variant of B as god of the storm?) and on 21*c we twice see a black form with the aged face and the solitary tooth in the under jaw (perhaps only a variant of M). In the Codex Cortesianus and in the Dresden manuscript no other black deities occur, but in the Paris manuscript a black deity seems to be pictured once (p. 21, bottom). According to Brinton (Nagualism, Philadelphia 1894, pp. 21, 39), there is among the Tzendals in addition to Ekchuah, a second black deity called Xicalahua, “black lord”. N. The God of the End of the Year. We have here a deity with the features of an old man and wearing a peculiar head ornament reproduced in Fig. 50, which contains the sign for the year of 360 days. The god’s hieroglyph is Fig. 49, which consists of the numeral 5 with the sign of the month Zac. Förstemann has recognized in god N the god of the ﬁve Uayeyab days, which were added as intercalary days at the end of the original year of 360 days, and were considered unlucky days. N is, therefore, the god of the end of the year. Förstemann has discussed him in detail under this title in a monograph published in Globus, Vol. 80, No. 12. It is still open to question whether god N actually occurs in all the places of the Dresden manuscript, which are mentioned by Förstemann. He can be recognized positively on Dr. 17a, 21c (grouped with a woman) and 37a; also on 120, but in this latter place with pronounced deviations from the usual representations. The ﬁgures in Dr. 23c (ﬁrst group) and 43a (third picture) are doubtful, especially since the hieroglyph of the god is lacking in both instances. The third group in Dr. 21c is equally dubious. Here a woman is pictured sitting opposite a god. The latter seems to be god N, yet in the text we ﬁnd instead of his sign the hieroglyph given in Fig. 51. It is not impossible that this sign likewise denotes god N. God N is found a few times in the Paris manuscript, for example on p. 4, where he holds K’s head in his hands, and on p. 22. O. A Goddess with the Features of an Old Woman. This goddess occurs only in the Madrid manuscript and is distinguished by the solitary tooth in the under jaw, as a sign of age, the invariable characteristic of aged persons in the manuscripts. She is pictured in the following places: Tro. 5*c, 6*b, and 11*b, c, and d, Cort. 10b, 11a, 38a. In Tro. 11* she is represented working at a loom. She does not appear at all in the Dresden and Paris manuscripts. The ﬁgures of women mentioned under I with the serpent on their heads, are especially not to be regarded as identical with goddess O, for she never wears the serpent, but a tuft of hair bound high up on her head and running out in two locks. Her hieroglyph is Fig. 52; it is distinguished by the wrinkles of age about the eye. Owning to the limited number of her pictures, there is little to be said concerning the signiﬁcance of this goddess. OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. P.  The Frog-God. We call him the frog-god because in the Codex Tro. 31, he is pictured in the ﬁrst and second lines with the club-shaped ﬁngers of a frog, which occur only on this ﬁgure. The blue background, which is his attribute twice in the same passage, likewise points to a connection with water, and that the god also has something to do with agriculture may be deduced from the fact that he is pictured sowing seed and making furrows with the planting-stick. The two black parallel stripes at the corner of the eye seem to be folds of skin or marks on the skin, which may represent a peculiarity of this particular species of frog. His head ornament is very characteristic and contains the sign for the year of 360 days. He therefore bears some unknown relation also to the computation of time. It should be recalled in this connection that one of the Maya months is called Uo, frog. The god is pictured again in Tro. 30a and b, Tro. 22 (top, scattering seed) and Cort. 5 (at the very bottom, the ﬁgure lying down). Finally his neck ornament must be mentioned, which, as a rule, consists of a neck-chain with pointed, oblong or pronged objects, probably shells. In the Dresden manuscript he occurs but once, Dr. 4a (ﬁrst ﬁgure), with some variations it is true. The text at this place contains H’s hieroglyph. God P does not occur in the Peresianus. His hieroglyph is Fig. 53. It occurs in Tro. 31 (top) and can be unerringly recognized by the two black parallel stripes at the corner of the eye, which correspond exactly to the same marks on the face of the picture of the god himself. This is all that can be said respecting this deity from the pictures in the manuscripts. Its meaning is obscure. Seler’s assumption that god P is Kukulcan (Zeitschrift für Ethnologie, 1898, p. 403) has certainly very slight foundation, and in view of the material from the manuscripts described in the preceding pages, it is in the highest degree improbable. * * * The foregoing is an almost complete enumeration of the god- ﬁgures proper in the Maya manuscripts. Whatever other ﬁgures of gods occur in the manuscripts are details of slight importance. This is especially true of the Dresden manuscript, which is well nigh exhausted by the types enumerated here; there may be, I think, a few ﬁgures still undescribed in the Madrid manuscript, the careless drawing of which renders the identiﬁcation very difﬁcult. An isolated ﬁgure of the Dresden manuscript still remains to be mentioned, concerning which it is doubtful whether it is intended to represent a deity or only a human personage. This is the ﬁgure characterized by a peculiar head ornament in Dr. 20b. It is designated in the text by two hieroglyphs, which belong together, Figs. 54 and 55, the latter occurring once with K (Dr. 7a). It seems to represent blowing from the mouth, screaming or speaking. II. MYTHOLOGICAL ANIMALS 1. THE MOAN BIRD. This bird1 belongs to the death-god as his symbol and attendant. Its hieroglyph (Fig. 66) contains the numeral 13; other forms are Figs. 57–59. It is pictured in Dr. 7c, 10a, 11a, 16c, 18b, and its hieroglyph without the picture is seen in Dr. 8b. A realistic representation of the whole ﬁgure of the moan as a bird, occurs on the head of the woman in 16c (1st ﬁgure) and 18b. God B sits on the head of the moan in Dr. 38c; the third hieroglyph of the accompanying text refers to this representation. Just as in Dr. 16 and 18, the moan bird appears in Tro. 18*c on the head of a woman. Its character as an attribute of the death-god is expressed by the Cimi-sign, which it wears upon its head (e. g., Dr. 10a), and also by the regular occurrence of symbols of the death-god in the written characters, which refer to the moan bird. In the same manner the sign of the owl, Fig. 6, also occurs frequently with it. The moan confers name and symbol alike on one of the eighteen months of the Maya year, and thus, as Förstemann conjectures (Die Plejaden bei den Mayas, in Globus, 1894), has an astronomic bearing on the constellation of the Pleiades. According to Brinton the moan is a member of the falcon family and its zoological name is Spizaetus tyrannus. 1 See plate for representations of the Mythological Animals, 1-6. (41) 2. THE SERPENT. This is one of the most common and most important mythological animals, and is closely related to different deities, as has already been more fully discussed in connection with the individual cases. Apparently it has no independent signiﬁcance as a deity. Its most important personiﬁcation is that in god B, Kukulcan, the feathered serpent. Hence a ﬁxed hieroglyph designating the serpent as a deity, as a mythologic form, does not occur, though there are numerous hieroglyphs which refer to serpents or represent individual parts of the serpent, as its coils, its jaws, the rattles of the rattlesnake, etc. The serpent appears in the mythologic conceptions of the Mayas chieﬂy as the symbol of water and of time. In the great series of numbers of the Dresden manuscript, certain numbers occur which are introduced in the coils of a large serpent (compare in regard to this, Förstemann, Zur Entzifferung der Mayahandschriften, II, Dresden, 1891). The serpent is very frequently represented in all the manuscripts, sometimes realistically and sometimes with the head of a god, etc. In the Dresden manuscript it occurs in the following places: 1a, 26, 27, 28c, 35b, 36a, 36b, 37b, 40, 42a, 61, 62, 65c, 66a and 69. it is prominent also in the Madrid manuscript, occurring for example in Cort. 4–6, 12–18, Tro. 26, 26, 27 and elsewhere. 3. THE DOG. Fig. 60 is its hieroglyph. It is the symbol of the death-god and the bearer of the lightning. The latter follows quite clearly from the picture in Dr. 40b where the god is distinguished by its hieroglyph. This animal is again represented in Dr. 7a, 13c on the right, 21b with its hieroglyph, 29a, 30a (forming a part of 31a, where god B holds the bound dog by the tail), and 39a without the hieroglyph, 47 (bottom) with a variant of the hieroglyph. In Dr. 36a the dog bears the Akbal-sign on its forehead. The writing above it contains a variant of the hieroglyph for the dog; OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. this is the third of the rubric. It shows (somewhat difﬁcult of recognition) the Akbal-sign on the forehead of the dog’s head occurring in it, and on the back of the head the Kin-sign, as symbols of the alternation of day and night. The same sign occurs again with adjuncts in Dr. 74 (last line, 2nd sign) and once with the death-god in Dr. 8a. The dog as lightning-beast occurs with the Akbal-sign in the eye instead of on the forehead in Codex Tro. 23*a; here again its hieroglyph is an entirely different one (the third of the rubric). That the dog belongs to the death-god is proved beyond a doubt by the regular recurrence in the writing belonging to the dog, of the hieroglyphs, which relate to this deity, especially of Fig. 5. According to Förstemann his day is Oc. 4. THE VULTURE. This bird is distinctly pictured as a mythological ﬁgure in Dr. 8a. It appears again, in feminine form, together with the dog, in Dr. 13c and also in 19a. In the ﬁrst passage, its hieroglyph is almost effaced; the hieroglyph is very striking and occurs nowhere else in the whole collection of manuscripts. The body of this animal.deity is striped black and white; in Dr. 38b it is almost entirely black. The same passage displays a second hieroglyph for this ﬁgure (Fig. 61); this hieroglyph also occurs with the numeral 4 in Dr. 56b. In Dr. 36b this bird of prey is pictured ﬁghting with the serpent; its hieroglyph occurs in the second form; the serpent is designated by the Chuen, the gaping jaws of the serpent (ﬁrst character of the rubric). Finally it should be mentioned that the head of this bird occurs frequently as a head ornament, thus in Dr. 11a, 11b, 12b and 14b. Mention should also be made of the realistic representations of the vulture, eating the eye of a human sacriﬁce (Dr. 3, Tro. 26*a and 27*a). According to Förstemann his day is Cib. 5. THE JAGUAR. The jaguar is likewise an animal with mythological signiﬁcance. It is represented in Dr. 8a, where its hieroglyph is the third sign in the writing; it also occurs in Dr. 26 (at the top). It occurs in Tro. 17 (at the end) with a hieroglyph which represents the jaguar’s head and contains the numeral 4 (Fig. 62); again it appears without a hieroglyph on p. 20 (bottom) and on 21 and 22 (bottom). Its day is Ix, and hence it also relates occasionally as year regent to the Ix years, for example in Dr. 26a. 6. THE TORTOISE. This animal, like the dog, appears as a lightning-beast (see Dr. 40b, middle). Its hieroglyph is Figs. 63, 64. This sign also is connected with the numeral 4, which occurs so often with animals (but not alone with quadrupeds) as to be worthy of attention. The sign of the tortoise without the numeral is seen in Cort. 17a where the tortoise itself is also represented. It must have reference to the 17th month of the Maya year, for the month Kayab (and apparently also Pop) contains the head of the tortoise (compare Fig. 65). It occurs several times in the Cortesianus, thus on pp. 13, 19, 37, 38; on p. 19 with the hieroglyph (on the top of the lower half of the page, 1st line and at the right of the margin). In Dr. 69 (at the top) we see the sign of the tortoise with the Kin-sign as its eye and the numeral 12; under this group B, with a black body, is seated on the serpent; on the same page the sign occurs again; each time, moreover, apparently as a month-hieroglyph. OF THE MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. According to Förstemann the tortoise is the symbol of the summer solstice, as the snail, which occurs only as a head ornament in the manuscripts and not independently, is the symbol of the winter solstice; both, as the animals of slowest motion, represent the apparent standstill of the sun at the periods speciﬁed. This explains why the month Kayab, in which the summer solstice falls, should be represented by the head of a tortoise, which has for its eye the sun-sign Kin (Förstemann, Zur Entzifferung der Mayahandschriften III, Schildkröte und Schnecke in der Mayaliteratur, Dresden 1892). According to Förstemann its day is Cauac. Finally the owl and the ape (or monkey) must be mentioned as animals of mythologic signiﬁcance, of which we have already spoken in connection with gods A and C. The scorpion also seems to have an important mythologic signiﬁcance, and appears in the manuscripts in connection with ﬁgures of gods, as, for example, in Cort. 7a and Tro. 31*a, 33*a, 34*a (god M with a scorpion’s tail). In addition to those discussed in this paper, there are a few animals in the manuscripts, which probably also have a partial mythologic signiﬁcance, but which have been omitted because they are represented in a naturalistic manner, thus, for example, the deer on Tro. 8, et seq., while idealization (with human bodies, with torches, hieroglyphic character on the head, etc.) should be considered as an unmistakable sign of mythologic meaning. A mythologic signiﬁcance also seems to belong to the bee which plays so prominent a part of the Codex Troano. Probably the section in question of the Madrid manuscript (1* et seq.) treats of bee-keeping, but incidentally it certainly has to do also with the mythologic conceptions connected with the culture of bees. The bat which is found as a mythological ﬁgure on pottery vessels and inscriptions from the Maya region (compare Seler, Zeitschrift für Ethnologie, 1894, p. 577) does not occur in the manuscripts. It is true, however, that hieroglyphic signs, which seem to relate to the head of the bat, occur in isolated cases in the manuscripts. SUMMARY. An enumeration of the most important deities in the manuscripts gives the following results, in connection with which it is to be noted that, of course, the numbers cannot be absolutely correct, because one or another of the pictures occasionally remains doubtful. As far as possible, however, only the positively determined representations have been considered. The deity occurring most frequently in the DRESDEN MANUSCRIPT is god B, who is pictured there 141 times. Following him in point of number in the same manuscript are the death-god A pictured 33 times, god D 19 times, and gods C and B 17 and 14 times respectively. In the MADRID MANUSCRIPT, god D, with 84 pictures, is of most frequent occurrence. He is followed by the maize-god E with 76 pictures, god B with 71, god A with 53, C with 38 and M with 37 pictures. In the PARIS MANUSCRIPT, god E’s picture can be veriﬁed 8 times, those of C and B 6 times each and that of god A twice; N and K are also frequently represented. An enumeration of all the pictures in all the manuscripts shows that the following deities occur most frequently and are therefore to be considered the most important: 1. God B: pictured 218 times. 2. ” D: ” 103 ” 3. ” E: ” 98 ” 4. ” A: ” 88 ” 5. ” C: ” 61 ” 6. ” M: ” 40 ” 7. ” F: ” 33 ” Furthermore, interesting conclusions can be arrived at, by means of a list of those deities, who occur in the representations of the manuscripts, so united or grouped together as to make it evident that they must stand in some relation to one another. Mythologic combinations of this kind occur among the following deities and mythological animals: SUMMARY 1. In the DRESDEN MANUSCRIPT: D and C, B and C, dog and vulture, bird and serpent, B and K. 2. In the MADRID MANUSCRIPT: F and M, B and M, C and M, E and M, A and E, A and D, A and F, B and C, D and C, D and E. 3. In the PARIS MANUSCRIPT: N and K, B and K. The most common of these combinations are those of the deities A and F, M and F, A and E, D and C. These groups are entirely intelligible, consisting of death-god and war-god, god of the travelling merchants and war-god, death-god and maize-god (as adversaries: meaning famine), night-god and deity of the polar star. Peabody Museum Papers. Vol. IV, Pt. 1. Precolumbia Mesoweb Press San Francisco Don Mech carefully arranges food and drink for prayers. Second, revised edition © 2012 by Precolumbia Mesoweb Press All rights reserved Produced, edited, and designed by Joel Skidmore, Marc Zender, and Chip Breitwieser Library of Congress Control Number 2011934246 ISBN 978-0-9821333-2-3 Printed in the United States of America Dedication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1 Author’s preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2 Pronunciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4 Becoming a shaman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8 Prayers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8 Blending belief systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 Santiguar: a simple cleansing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 Divination: reading the signs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 K’eex: payment to the underworld. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .40 Waajil kool/jaanlil kool: feast of the corn field . . . . . . . . . .57 Ch’a’ cháak: bringing rain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87 Loj kaajtal: taking back the land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .106 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .136 Personal experience with the supernatural . . . . . . . . . . . 136 One last comment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .139 References cited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .140 Glossary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140 Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .145 Don Eduardo Peraza Castillo. In 1978 my wife and I and our seven-year-old son planted ourselves in Becanchen, Yucatan, so that I could improve my Spanish and begin to learn Mayan. In the second month of our stay I was invited to observe, photograph, and tape-record a ceremony led by village shaman Don Ramón Cámara. Over the next several weeks the local store owner and town registrar, Don Eduardo Peraza Castillo, worked late into the night with my old push-button cassette recorder translating from Mayan to Spanish the recorded prayers from the ceremony, which allowed me later to use this material for my Master’s thesis and various publications. I dedicate this book to Don Ramón and Don Eduardo for introducing me to the world of contemporary Maya religion and to the town of Becanchen, which opened its arms to me and my family. Dedication The publisher and I are pleased to offer this new edition of Maya Shamanism Today, a summary of thirty years of fieldwork among the rural Mayas of the Yucatan Peninsula. Do not look for extraterrestrials, hallucinogenic trances, or prophecies for the end of the Maya calendar. This book is about the working shamans who in their daily lives perform the job of intermediary between their fellow villagers and beings in the spirit world that control the rains, the harvest, sickness and health, birth and death. The color photos and the descriptions in this new edition span the period from 1978 into the new millennium, and I can tell you there is no sign that these ritual practices are disappearing. Please accept the contents of this book as a gift to you from the Mayas themselves who accepted me into their communities and encouraged me to tell the outside world about their lives and their manner of living. It would do the living Mayas a disservice to ascribe to them supernatural powers that fit only our own notion of spirituality. How much better to let them tell us themselves, through their actions in their daily lives, about life in a world controlled by spirit forces. I pray I have honestly conveyed their message. Pronunciation Vowels in the Yukatek Mayan language are similar to Spanish, so a sounds like English “ah,” e is pronounced as in English “bet,” i is like English “meet,” o is like English “mote,” and u is like English “lute.” When the vowel is doubled it is held longer. “X” in Mayan sounds like “sh.” (Frequently the Mayas use x as a prefix, Maya Shamanism Today as in x-tut, the sacred breads; in English this would be pronounced “sh-toot,” as in “toot your horn.”) The Mayan plural ending is o’ob, generally pronounced to rhyme with the long “o” in “strobe.” The letter j used in writing Mayan words is pronounced with the aspirated sound of English h but with the air constricted by the palette as in Spanish jota. The word for shaman is aj-meen, generally shortened to j-meen and pronounced with a slight aspiration of the j and then meen as in the English word “men” but with the e drawn out. J-meen means “practitioner,” one who knows and does. More often than not the local Mayas drop the j altogether and pronounce the word meen, with the extended “eh” sound for the ee. The Mayan language of Yucatan has tone, or high and low pitch, that linguists recognize as being significant in distinguishing some grammatical and semantic differences. I follow conventions established in 1984 in Yucatan by linguists and educators in marking high tone, as in the previously mentioned x-tut. A long vowel without marking is understood to be low. To standardize vowel length and tone, as well as placement of glottal stops and other spelling conventions, I follow two recent contemporary dictionaries, Bastarrachea et al. 1992 and Martínez Huchim 2005. Glottal stops, marked with an apostrophe, are important in Mayan. Ba’al, which means “thing,” has a stop in the middle similar to the English “button” if you pronounce it without clearly saying the “tt.” Instead of pronouncing the “tt” in “button” most speakers of English instead quickly close their glottis (hence the name glottal stop). Say “button” this way and notice the stop in your throat; now try ba’al. Consonants marked with an apostrophe are also “glottalized” and pronounced with an explosive sound. I use the word Maya and Mayas (plural) for the people, the culture, the archaeology, etc., and Mayan for the language. The Mayas speak Mayan. Pronunciation In a remote village in eastern Yucatan, on a warm afternoon in 1992, my Maya friend Damiano and I were relaxing in his rustic palm-roofed house when his younger brother Adán burst in, sweating, out of breath, and very agitated. In hushed tones he related the following story. He was working in his corn field that day, moving through the tall dry stalks, doubling over the tops to preserve the ears until harvest. Suddenly a strong invisible force hit him in the calf, shot up his pant leg, and left out his waist. It knocked him over. He saw the corn moving but there were no animals or birds. He was very afraid. Damiano’s eyes sparkled with intensity as the event’s significance registered in his mind. It was iik’, “wind,” he explained, teaching his sibling: k’aak’as ba’al, “evil thing.” Then in hushed tones: “It was caused by a j-pulya’aj”—and he translated for me from Mayan to Spanish: “hechicero” or “brujo.” A witch. So that evening, after dark, quietly taking the back streets of this small Maya village, we went to the house of the shaman Don Aleex to seek understanding and council. He greeted us through his front gate, a system of thin poles tied together in a framework spanning the rough opening in the limestone-boulder wall. After listening intently to Adán’s story of events in the cornfield, he motioned us to enter, and led us through the darkness to a small pole-and-thatch hut in the yard beside his house. There, by candlelight, he performed divination to ascertain the cause and meaning of this frightening occurrence. From his small bag of ritual paraphernalia he brought out thirteen corn kernels. On a low wooden table, as we watched in silent expectation, he shuffled them together, moving his cupped hand back and forth across the surface. He drew out four, then put them back in the pile. Maya Shamanism Today Then he arranged the corn into two groupings, three kernels in a line and a square of four. The remainder were piled to the side. Satisfied, he looked up and gave his reading, or cuenta. He told Adán he must obtain a number of secretos, special items, and return that night at three for a santiguar. The Maya brothers nodded, understanding. I asked Don Aleex if we might possibly wait until daytime so I could take pictures. No, he said, it had to be done at night, in the hour of silence. We returned at three in the morning, as instructed. Don Aleex was arranging his table with cups of saka’, a white corn drink, and branches of xi’imche’, sacred leaves. He placed seven cups of saka’ on the leaves, four in a square and three in a line, and a separate cup of bendisibi ja’, “agua bendita, holy water,” to one side. At the front of the table he lit three candles and began burning cháal, a special incense. He splashed some clear cane liquor on his hands, rubbed them together, and dabbed some on his face. He was now ready. He instructed Adán to kneel in front of the table, and then rubbed Adán’s joints with leaves of tankas che’. Using a few sprigs of siipilche’, he began praying and passing the leaves over Adán’s head. When done, he dipped the leaves in holy water and took them out the back door into the yard. He came back with a single leaf, which he dipped into the holy water, said a prayer, and began pouring the seven cups of saka’ back into a pail. He gathered up all the xi’imche’ leaves and took them outside, into the darkness. The table was now bare except for three candles and the burned-down incense. Throughout the proceedings one of the candles kept going out. It was a se, “sign,” Don Aleex said, without elaboration. Then he did corn divination. He shuffled the thirteen kernels and pulled out six, which he arranged four in a square with two below. He shuffled them again and pulled out six. One of them was standing upright! He left it in place and arranged the other five in a circle underneath it. Then he shuffled again and pulled out five. He read his sáastun, his sacred seeing device, against the candlelight, then took Introduction 6 out a second, smaller sáastun, and read it. Finally, he put away his corn. Our attention turned to the candles. Don Aleex blew them out and inspected them thoughtfully. The one that had kept going out had been spitting and hissing and burning unevenly, creating drops and bumps of wax down the side. He counted the bumps very carefully. Bad news, he said, it was a very bad thing, k’aas ba’al. It was a sign from God. He gave the middle candle, one of the good candles, to Adán and told him to take it home to his patrn, or patron saint. He would have to come back the next night, again at three in the morning, to perform a k’eex, the next higher level of spiritual cleansing, involving ritual exchange and sacrifice of chickens . . . And so progresses spiritual healing. The attack in the corn field by invisible forces prompted young Adán, under his older brother’s council, to seek a diviner’s interpretation, which led in turn to prayers and cleansing with sacred leaves. When God sent a sign that Adán’s troubles were more serious than first thought, stronger medicine was prescribed in the form of more elaborate rituals with food offerings. When finally, on the third night, Adán had made his proper and adequate sacrifices, offerings, penance, and promises, he no longer was victim to the outside evil that had attacked him so suddenly three days before. His state of spiritual balance returned. He felt protected. Don Aleex, a village shaman, drew from his vast store of centuries-old secret knowledge, shared by Maya shamans across Yucatan, to bring about healing. Well-being was restored. In this example, divination led to a santiguar, which in turn led to a k’eex. The rituals can occur sequentially, or they may be embedded within one another. Divination occurs during rain ceremonies, and santiguars are performed in the middle of thanksgiving rites, but what may appear confusing to the outsider is in fact well-ordered to the skilled shaman. It is part of a strategy for managing life in a complex Maya Shamanism Today supernatural world. Maya villagers throughout the peninsula of Yucatan rely on local shamans to mediate between them and the spirit world, where forces beyond ordinary control can bring sickness, cause accidents, and most important, damage the harvest. There are 600,000 native Mayan-language speakers in Yucatan today, people for whom Mayan is their first language. Corn farming is the principal occupation, using a simple but effective system of cutting the forest, letting it dry, burning, planting, and harvesting. The corn field is central to Maya health and happiness. Rain is the key, and perhaps the shaman’s greatest work is the dramatic and theatrical annual rain ceremony. But the village shaman also has day-to-day responsibilities, usually in the form of healings, cleansings, and divination. In the following pages I discuss six principal types of ritual practice, which I have arranged in order from the simple to the complex, from the one-on-one healing event known as the santiguar, to a complex week.long affair in which an entire village is cleansed of evil winds. As you will see, however, there are few clearly marked or strictly held boundaries between these various classes of ceremonies. The shaman demonstrates his art and skill by elaborating and improvising within basic outlines. Thus, from town to town there is great variation in ritual performance, but the rites revolve around a central theme: the manipulation and orchestration of the Maya spirit world. Spirit beings can be allies or enemies, helpers or pranksters, life givers or death dealers. The shaman helps his fellow villagers travel through this cosmic tangle. Introduction Most Maya shamans say they learned to become a j-meen through divine intervention; either through dreams, being miraculously saved, or through near-death experiences. No doubt these are factors, but there are also mentor-apprentice relationships. At the loj kaajtal ceremony described below I witnessed such an apprentice at work (Figure 1). He was there because he was learning to become a j-meen. He prayed, sprinkled báalche’, and burned incense at a small mesa, all under the direction of Don Es, the recognized town shaman who was performing the same rites at a larger mesa. Once, during my visit to his home, the apprentice showed me a jar of glass marbles. “These are just toys,” he said. “They are not real.” He used them to practice reading the sáastun, the famous Maya “crystal ball.” I have even seen a notebook filled with written prayers and recipes for different ritual occasions. A j-meen had written the notebook to pass on his knowledge to a student. I see no evidence of the shaman’s work fading out, even with modernization. I like to quote Robert Redfield, who in 1934 published a classic anthropological description of Maya village life. “In Chan Kom,” he wrote, “we are seeing the last generation of Mayas to practice the indigenous rites and rituals associated with the village shaman.” Now, some eighty years later, people are still saying the practice is rapidly dying out; but from what I see it is not disappearing at all. Only time will tell (Figure 2). Prayers The shaman’s prayers, in essence, are long lists of sacred names, including Maya gods, Catholic saints, holy shrines, archaeological sites, and cenotes, or underground water sources. One also names the participants, Maya Shamanism Today Figure 1. A shaman-in-training sprinkles báalche’ over the chan mesa, the small altar, under the direct supervision of Don Espiridión. Figure 2. A century ago British ethnographer Thomas Gann described rain ceremonies among the Mayas of (then) British Honduras. He could have been describing a twenty-first century ch’a’ cháak for all the similarities. Illustration from Gann 1917. the offerings, the day, and the time of day. In the case of the waajil kool, one may call out the size of the milpa (corn field), for example, sixty mecates. Naming is the key. The more inclusive a register of entities, the better the effect. Almost always the Holy Trinity comes first, for example tu kili’ich k’aaba’ Dios Yuumbil, Dios Meejenbil, Dios Espiritu Santo, “in the holy name of God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Spirit.” As an example of naming, in the waajil kool prayers from Becanchen, Don Ramón prays: “I stand here before the mesa, I offer these first fruits to . . .” and there follows a recitation of names of báalamo’ob, “spirit protectors,” kanaano’ob, “guardians,” iik’o’ob, “winds,” meyajo’ob, “spirit workers,” joyajo’ob, “waterers,” and tepalo’ob, “rulers.” The offerings themselves are called out: corn drink, fermented honey, bread crumb soup, layered breads, cigarettes, chickens, and turkeys. Then follow the Catholic saints, first women, then men: Santa Ana, Santa Lucía, Perfecto Socorro, Santa Librada, Santa Asunción, Virgin de Fátima, Virgin de Guadalupe, Santa María, and Santa Marta. The male saints are San Juan Bautista, San Pedro, San Isidro, San Antonio, San José, San Joaquin, San Felipe, San Lorenzo, San Buenaventura, San Francisco, San Dimas, San Martín, San Bernardino, San Miguel Maya Shamanism Today Arcangel, and Niño de Atocha. There are also the regional holy santos: Tres Reyes de Tizimín, San Román Campeche, Santiago Halachó, and Santo Cristo Chumayel. All the above were named, repeatedly, in proper order to provide protection for Luis Xool, the corn farmer, and his family and his milpa. Prayers are long and low, usually just a murmur. The words themselves are holy, chben t’aan, “ancient speech.” A single prayer can last up to thirty minutes, usually including multiple repetitions of phrases and sections. Within the prayers are interspersed Mayan phrases that connect the parts together, phrases like utia’al bakáan xan that do not translate directly, but when repeated over and over form a liturgical rhythm. The outside participants generally do not listen or try to understand the prayers. They quietly talk among themselves and go about preparing the offerings of food and drink as the j-meen focuses on the altar, consecrating it with holy, ancient words. Blending belief systems Throughout the towns and villages of Yucatan (and probably in the big cities, too) Maya shamans conduct rites and ceremonies that are outside the purview of the Catholic Church; but this does not mean they are not Catholic. They are. But in a typical small village the Catholic priest may come to town only two or three times a year, usually to perform a wedding ceremony. At that wedding he will baptize the children born since his last visit. In the priest’s absence Catholic ritual continues in the form of evening novenas, or prayer singing, in which groups of males sing, in Spanish, from their Catholic song books (Figure 3). Church assistants light Blending belief systems 12 candles and incense and place offerings of various drinks on the altar while women and children sit on chairs and benches. After the songs, the men pass in front of the numerous saints on the altar, crossing themselves in reverence before each image. Afterwards, everyone shares the drinks. Novenas are also frequently performed in private homes, where women singers often take a lead role. In towns where evangelists have converted portions of the population to any number of Protestant sects, church life is of course quite different. Since my own fieldwork has been among practicing Catholics, I can only report that aspect of the Maya religious experience. A good example of how Maya indigenous ritual mixes with Catholicism occurred in a rustic village church when novena singers were performing their songs in front of the church altar while the shaman was kneeling beside the altar holding up cups of drink offerings (Figure 4). At a point during the novena he went outside and hung his offerings in the trees for the Maya spirits of the fields and forests. The line between what is “Maya” and what is “Catholic” is not clear, although language is one marker. Novenas are in Spanish, but just before the j-meen took his offerings outside, the singers switched to Mayan. Mayan is for the agricultural and forest gods, Spanish is for the santos on the altars in church and home. The j-meen is in charge of the Maya spirit world; the visiting priest and the novena singers operate the Catholic one, but the distinction blurs as the two worlds merge. Syncretism, or mixing of belief systems, follows a pattern today that was established five hundred years ago at the arrival of the Spaniards. The Maya people accepted certain aspects of Catholicism but the Catholic priesthood would not accept the indigenous faith. Today the j-meen incorporates Catholic saints in his prayers to the rain gods, but the rain gods would never be mentioned in a Catholic mass (Figure 5). At least the Church no longer persecutes followers of the indigenous ways. Maya Shamanism Today Figure 3. Village singers in their rustic palm thatch church sing Catholic novenas during evening services. Figure 4. Cups of drink offerings are presented to the Catholic saints and then hung outside in a nearby tree for the spirit protectors of the fields and forests. Figure 5. The holy cross, draped in a white shroud, is incorporated into the ch’a’ cháak rain ceremony, a strong example of syncretism or blending of belief systems. During the first century of Spanish rule the dominating clergy punished any Mayas found practicing the old customs. In one tragic case of cultural misunderstanding a group of seventeenth-century Maya religious practitioners was making a procession, wearing robes and head-gear similar to ecclesiastic garments. They were accused of mimicking and mocking the Church and were severely punished when, in fact, the Mayas were honoring the Church by adopting some of its attributes. The Church today knows that the Mayas of the forest practice an indigenous form of religion and seems to accept it. From the beginning of Maya-Spanish contact the religions showed some remarkable parallels, at least in outward appearances. The ancient Mayas walked in religious processions carrying images; Maya priests wore robes, sprinkled holy water, and burned incense. There was a belief in an afterlife and a form of heaven. To this day one of the trickiest questions is which part of Maya ceremonial life comes from Spain and which part is indigenous. During one ch’a’ cháak, or rain ceremony, that I witnessed, the Mayas constructed a row of four arches leading from the main mesa, or altar, to a small shrine with a holy cross (Figure 6). A student of colonial churches in Yucatan suggested to me that the arches were an imitation of church architecture, creating a sacred space in the forest similar to the high ceilings and sanctuaries in town. On the other hand, we have a description from a sixteenth-century priest, before the Mayas incorporated Spanish religious practices, of a Maya procession passing through a forest trail “adorned with arches.” Likewise, the symbolic importance of the direction east may or may not come from Catholicism. The Mayas always orient their mesas, or ceremonial altars, to the east. But the altars in the Catholic churches— at least in Mexico—face that way, too. In other words, the person standing in front of the altar, facing it, is facing east. Did the Mayas adapt the Catholic way or is the orientation a coincidence? The ancient Mayas Maya Shamanism Today Figure 6. Palm arches define sacred space in the forest clearing. Is this a holdover from Precolumbian times or an influence of the Catholic church? At the base of each arch is a stone seat for the cháako’ob, gods of rain, thunder, and lightning. 18 made báalche’, a ritual fermented drink; today the báalche’ is commonly referred to as “vino,” apparently in reference to the Catholic ritual wine. Certain breads, baked in the pit ovens along with other ceremonial breads, serve as “host” during a form of communion performed by the village j-meen in the absence of Catholic priests (Figure 7). San Isidro is patron saint for the corn farmers and is referred to as lord of the milpa (Figure 8). The whole matter of syncretism is worth a book-length treatise. Individual Mayas perform prayers and services in their homes and with their neighbors, carry out funeral rites, commemorate bereavement anniversaries, gather for baptism ceremonies known as jéetsméek’, make offerings in the corn fields for the aluxo’ob and báalamo’ob, venerate santos in their homes, and do innumerable activities that could be called religious. For this discussion, however, I focus on the ceremonies and rites performed by the j-meeno’ob of Yucatan, the shamans. These are rites that they alone can run correctly. They possess ancient knowledge of sacred formulae crucial to making events successful. There is another class of religious ceremony known as the gremio, which includes multiple processions with delegations from numerous communities. These are not included in the current work because they are not directly conducted by the j-meen, although j-meeno’ob play an important role. They are more in line with religious festivals or fiestas than shamanic rituals. The following rites and rituals, with their myriad variations, are ongoing today throughout the peninsula. Here begins their telling. Santiguar: a simple cleansing Santiguars are performed to cleanse people of dangerous and harmful winds. In the Maya view, most sickness comes from winds (consider the word “malaria,” from the Italian mala aria, “bad air”), and the Maya Shamanism Today Figure 7. A version of Catholic communion performed as part of the rain ceremony is administered by the village j-meen in the absence of Catholic clergy. Figure 8. San Isidro—saint of the corn fields—carries his hourglass-shaped gourd water bottle, machete, sharpening file, steel-tipped planting stick, axe, gourd cups for mixing posole, and rifle. Maya shaman has the power to exorcise those winds. Strictly translated, santiguar, a Spanish word, means to make the sign of the cross on something, but for the Mayas it is a healing ritual in which the shaman prays over his patient while brushing him or her down with sacred, anointed leaves. Sometimes he makes the sign of the cross on the patient and sometimes not, depending on his own practice. Variations are innumerable. My own first encounter with santiguars was in Popola, a small Mayan-speaking village just north of Valladolid. Don Esteban did curings in his palm-thatched home on Tuesdays and Fridays. On one particular day in 1983, as I sat by the door, notebook and camera in hand, a man came complaining of a headache. Don Esteban’s altar, in the dark interior at the east end of the house, was ready. On the altar sat a rustic wooden box with a glass door in front containing five santos, or religious statues. The biggest one, at the back and in the center, was the Virgen de Fátima. Forming an arc in front of her, from her left to her right, stood the Virgen de Perfecto Socorro, Corazón de Jesús, Virgen de Guadalupe, and an angel with no particular name. On the wooden table in front of the santos were five candle holders, including a clay one in the shape of a bird. Some freshly picked flowers adorned the scene. On one corner stood an empty shot glass. Don Esteban motioned for the man to sit facing east, toward the altar. He lit candles and poured aguardiente, a clear liquor made from sugar cane, into the shot glass (Figure 9). Then he reached down, picked up a piece of folded cloth, and carefully unwrapped a very tiny object. Pinching it between his thumb and forefinger, he dipped it into the liquor. It was called kooj kaan, “tooth of snake”—a rattlesnake fang! He methodically pricked the man’s neck and shoulder area about a dozen times, placing each fang prick carefully, giving special attention to the lower right side of the neck. Then he put away his rattlesnake fang and applied cane liquor to the man’s neck, rubbing it in with his fingers. Santiguar: a simple cleansing shrub with the peculiar trait that its leaves are arranged like crosses, one leaf pointing up and two leaves pointing out to either side. Over and over within a single bush these cross patterns appear, giving the plant a very sacred quality (Figure 10). The leaves are dark green, small, and rounded, with a small pointed tip. Throughout the peninsula shamans select bundles of these leaves to do purifications and cleansings. Sprinkling the bundles with aguardiente gives them added power. With this purified leafy bundle, standing to the side of the patient, Don Esteban began brushing down the patient’s head and shoulders while quietly murmuring prayers (Figure 11). He did this for about two minutes, and then moved to the back of the patient and repeated the brushing and the praying, but this time for about seven minutes. At the end of each prayer Don Esteban circled the air above the patient’s head with the leaves, counterclockwise, and finished with an upward spiraling flourish, as if to draw out sickness from the patient and send it skyward. Then it was over. The patient paid Don Esteban a minimal fee, exchanged a few quiet words, and left. On subsequent days I witnessed the same performance on a man with pain at the base of his skull, a man with a sore shoulder, and a mother and young daughter who took turns sitting in the chair (Figure 12). In the latter case the little girl was constantly blinking her eyes very hard. Something was seriously bothering her. After he finished doing santiguar Don Esteban gave the mother a small bag of leaves, a paper package of medicine, and instructions for their use. The girl was no longer blinking! This was my first indication, occurring early in my days of field work, that these healings really worked. The mother asked the girl if her eyes hurt. No, she said, meekly. They left together and I watched out the Maya Shamanism Today Figure 9. Don Esteban, in front of his home altar, uses clear cane liquor to purify his healing instruments. front door, bending to peer under the palm leaves as they disappeared hand-in-hand down the dirt street lined with white-painted rock walls, turning a corner to their home. As for the man with the sore shoulder, I know his pain also lessened and his condition improved, because I was that patient. The basic idea of the santiguar is to remove winds, iik’ in Mayan. The following list was compiled from personal field notes, and in most cases I was able to get an explanation as to their form or their nature. For some, I heard the names in tape recordings and did not have a chance to ask about them. Partial list of sickness-causing winds (Remember, the x is pronounced like “sh” in English) x-áakat iik’: a wind that skips or hops along the ground, leaping forward in an arcing motion. bjuka’an iik’: a wind that comes down from the sky and injures people. x-buyut iik’: a wind that covers a person’s body like a blanket. x-color iik’: three winds—white, black, and red (sak iik’, boox iik’, chak iik’); they are three distinct winds but mentioned as a group. x-k’oha’an iik’: a weak wind, not very strong. míisib iik’: a sweeping wind. mosoon iik’: a whirlwind. papagayo iik’: a wind that comes from high in the sky, strikes people and hurts them, then goes back again, far away to the sky. pa[u]pa[?] iik’: unknown. Santiguar: a simple cleansing x-péepem iik’: a wind that moves like a butterfly. siete machos, siete burros, siete rayas: no explanation given except that they are twenty-one winds. tankas iik’: a spirit or soul wind (all animals have tankas) that causes numbness in parts of the body. x-toj iik’: a strong wind that shoots along in a straight line. x-tuis[?] iik’: a wind that moves along the ground somewhat similar to x-áakat iik’ but instead of hopping or skipping directly forward, each time it rises up it loops back on itself, advancing forward but in a backward-looping fashion. t’u’ul paach iik’: a wind that strikes a person in the back or follows a person. tulix iik’: a wind in the form of a dragonfly; it comes from the forest, from around pools of standing water. yuyu iik’: unknown, possibly in the form of an oriole, yuuya or yyum. Most commonly a bundle of siipilche’ works to brush down a patient, but I have also seen tankas che’ and ruda used, two other species of sacred plants (Figure 13). I am sure there are other varieties available. In one case a shaman used a heavy fist-sized object wrapped in a black cloth. When he showed it to me I discovered it was an archaeological piece, a crudely carved jaguar made of limestone. Santiguars are the most frequently performed healing ceremonies in Yucatan, covering a multitude of minor ailments including stomachaches, headaches, sore throats, and earaches. When the symptoms persist and the santiguars do not seem to be working, the shaman needs to divine the underlying cause and proceed to a higher, more complex level of curing. The causes, as understood by the shaman and his patients, are almost always supernatural. To understand them requires divination. Maya Shamanism Today Divination is the art of perceiving secret knowledge. The shaman, through mastery of his techniques, sees and interprets information hidden from the uninitiated. Many Maya people rely on divination by shamans to help them understand their world and to receive guidance in their affairs. They come to their shaman with questions like, What is causing my sickness? Which direction should I go to hunt deer? When should I plant corn? At least in some parts of the peninsula divination is called joots’ik cuenta, “extract an account,” or “draw out a reading.” Shamans accomplish this with corn kernels, with sáastuno’ob, and with other revered objects. Divination by corn kernels, in its simplest form (if there is such a thing as simple divination), consists of laying out thirteen kernels in a sacred pattern, shuffling the corn together, and drawing out numbers of kernels (Figure 14). Numerology is the key to understanding divination, and thirteen is the holiest of numbers. Don Es of Xuilub makes two columns on his small wooden altar with three pairs of kernels in each column, making a total of six on the left and six on the right. The thirteenth kernel is the center, called puksi’ik’al, “heart.” He shuffles them together with his hand and draws out a number. Then he shuffles them all together again and draws out another number. After repeating this three times, all the while praying, he has received inspiration. A divine answer has begun to emerge. Then he reads his sáastun (Figure 15). Most often the sáastun is a small glass ball, a marble really; but many other glass objects, often faceted, are also used, such as bottle stoppers and antique glass doorknobs. I remember how disappointed I was when I first saw the glass marbles. Not only were they common playthings—I thought—but they were rather defective, full of air bubbles. Little did I know these bubbles Maya Shamanism Today played a key role in the shaman’s communication with the spirit world. The Maya use of “crystal balls” is fairly well known, and there is a certain excitement and romanticization by outsiders regarding this practice. But we must take care not to preconceive how they are used, thinking that visions or images appear in them. Fortunately, by working closely with a number of shamans I was finally able to understand—in a beginner’s sort of way—what they were looking for as they peered into these glass spheres. When Don Es uses his sáastun he holds the glass ball in front of a candle and watches how the light catches the small bubbles inside (Figure 16). By turning the marble he makes the bubbles cluster in groupings. As with the corn kernels, the numbers hold the answer: three is for the tres personas (father, son, and holy spirit), and four is for the santo wíinklil, “the holy ones,” a generic term for the rain gods or sky gods. By combining the readings from the corn kernels and the sáastuno’ob, he makes a meaningful cuenta, or account. In a remote village in Quintana Roo I witnessed a rather spectacular divining session using sixty corn kernels and four sáastuno’ob. My friend Damiano from Xuilub had a serious pain in the side of his mouth and decided to visit a j-meen other than his own grandfather. He loaned me a bicycle and we rode for half an hour on dirt roads to arrive at San Silverio where Damiano found the house of Don José, a shaman of wide renown. “Who is he?” asked Don José, nodding his head in my direction. Damiano explained that I studied Itza things, like Chichen Itza and the work of the ancient ones. Don José seemed content with the answer and let me photograph and tape-record. As Don José led us to his back yard the sun was just setting and the western sky was glowing. He sat at Divination: reading the signs a small wooden table with Damiano at one side. The mesa had a small wooden cross on the west side, and a large pile of corn kernels with a small cloth bundle on top. He unwrapped the cloth and took out not one sáastun, but four! I had never heard of using so many. First he picked up one of the smaller ones, an amber-colored marble, and placed it between the forefinger and middle finger of his left hand, holding it out at arm’s length toward the western horizon. Then he put a small green one beside it, still holding it out toward the sky. With his right hand he slowly turned them and positioned them until they “lighted.” Then he positioned a large clear glass marble between his middle finger and his ring finger, and finally put the fourth one below that, between his ring and little finger. He held all four sáastuno’ob at arm’s length, toward the sky above the horizon, and stared into them intently until he was satisfied. “Look!” he said to me in Mayan. “See the little holes in the sky?” As I peered closely into the bottom sáastun, suddenly the light caught the little bubbles inside and they flashed. “Look!” he repeated. “You can see the angels.” “Ti’ aan te’ ka’an elo’ ” (there they are in the sky). “This is how they speak to me. They are near. Their word comes down. The spirit makes a blessing, makes salvation. The holy ones make a sign and then ready!” Damiano explained to me that the santo wíinklil, or holy beings, communicate through the sáastun from a great distance—all the way from the sky. Peering into the sáastun is actually “seeing” the sky. When the sáastun lights, Don José has received his “sign.” He is sanctioned and empowered by the sky beings. Now he can read the kernels. He immediately started shuffling kernels of corn and praying. He shuffled them fast and hard, back and forth, in the middle of the table. Suddenly he stopped, made the sign of the cross over the pile, pulled out Divination: reading the signs 36 about half the kernels, and set them to one side. From the remaining pile in the center he began pulling out bunches of five. Five, five, five, five, and one left over. He put the one left over at the top of the table to his left. Then he combined all the kernels together and started shuffling and praying again. He stopped, crossed the pile, and divided it in half. From the remaining half he again pulled out bunches of five. Five, five, five, and four left over. These four he put at the top, to the right of the one. He repeated this process four more times until across the top he had a one, four, one, two, one, and a five. On the seventh repetition he did the same thing again except when he pulled out the clusters of five he arranged them along the bottom of the table from his left to his right. After four bunches of five there were two left over, which he placed above, completing the arc of numbers across the top. Siete puntos, seven points, he explained. That still left the half pile in the middle. From this pile he also pulled bunches of five and placed them along the bottom in line with the other fives. Finally, there were three left over. He put these three in the middle. When all was done, he had eight fives across the bottom, a small pile of three in the middle, and an arc across the top reading one, four, one, two, one, five, and two. As I recorded this in my notebook, counting along with Don José, a shiver ran through my body as I realized I was making bars and dots that looked like ancient Maya numbers—bars for fives, dots for ones! Don José looked at his sáastuno’ob again, and then proceeded to give Damiano a reading based on the seven puntos. He talked back and forth with Damiano asking him about his pain and how long he had had it. He told Damiano to come back tomorrow and bring certain numbers of leaves of various herbs and three eggs. The numbers across the top of the table helped him decide how many of which remedies to bring the next day. Maya Shamanism Today Don José borrowed my flashlight and went into the darkening forest to get some plant medicine. He came back with a green sprig, broke it open, and put drops of sticky white sap directly on Damiano’s tongue. As we left, Damiano said his mouth felt better. Tomorrow he would return to complete his healing, following instructions divined by Don José. There is another method of divination that I have seen only once in Yucatan, but I have heard that it is used as far away as Guatemala and the Mexican state of Guerrero. I suspect it is employed all over Central and North America. It is from a book called Oráculo novísimo o sea el libro de los destinos, a book of oracles. The copy I saw was published in Mexico City in 1950. Three men came to the house of Don Esteban, the village j-meen mentioned earlier, who performed santiguars in Popola. They looked as though they had come a long way on foot, probably on a forest trail. They were very concerned about a sick woman back at their village. They spoke intently to Don Esteban before the j-meen took down from a shelf an old frayed book wrapped in newspaper. Carefully opening it, he unfolded a large page of figures that almost covered the table (Figure 17). The page was filled with rows and columns of images, in some ways similar to tarot cards, with cups, swords, skulls, and numerous other icons. Don Esteban instructed one of the men to circle his hand over the table three times counterclockwise, and then drop his hand down with an outstretched forefinger so that it landed on an image. After he did this Don Esteban opened the text and read the appropriate passage. He did this three times in all, and then a long discussion followed. Don Esteban went out the back door and returned wrapping something in newspaper, making a small Divination: reading the signs package that he put on the altar. He then took out a small clean white cloth and put it, too, on the altar. He 39 proceeded to pray over the objects and sprinkle them with aguardiente. Then he folded the cloth and handed it and the package to the three men and gave them detailed instructions on how to use them, based in part on information gained from the Book of Oracles. The men paid Don Esteban and left to go back to their village. Three days later they returned with the sick woman so that Don Esteban could perform a proper healing for her. After years of observing the practice of divination in Yucatan, I began to understand the connection to the ancient past. Maya codices, or painted hieroglyphic books, were used to divine good and bad auguries for days and events. Filled with images of gods, hieroglyphic phrases, and sacred numbers, the ancient Maya books guided the priests, giving divine prescriptions for correct performance on ritual occasions. The codices named the type and number of offerings for proper ceremonial observances in Precolumbian times just as the siete puntos of Don José, the seven piles of corn kernels in an arc across the mesa, told the modern diviner—descendant of the ancient Itza—how many leaves of herbs to use, how many eggs to bring the next day, and how many days to take the medicines. In both cases—the modern diviner with his sáastun and corn kernels and the ancient Maya priest with his hieroglyphic books—the instructions come from the invisible world of gods and spirits residing in the sky. Divine guidance is made manifest to the religious specialist through his holy instruments so he may convey the hidden messages to his fellows. Divination: reading the signs Don Mech was a great and humble j-meen. When I knew him he lived at Chac Neh, a small settlement deep in the Quintana Roo forest, on the ancient raised-stone highway leading west from Coba. A narrow footpath takes the traveler along the 1000-year-old causeway, away from the tourist center and its surrealistic Club Med hotel (where visitors cannot open their windows because the rooms are sealed shut against snakes, scorpions, poisonous centipedes, and all else that the dark jungle offers). In 1983 a diesel.fueled generator powered this ultra-modern edifice amidst a town with no electricity and no running water, a palm-thatch settlement of Mayan-speaking corn farmers. But within a bare 100 meters the dense foliage muffles the roar of the generator, and the trail, like hundreds of thousands of other trails in Yucatan, becomes a narrow artery to the corn fields and bee hives, a back road to neighboring habitations, a trail only for the locals. Demetrio, or Don Mech, invited me to come to Chac Neh on a Friday in January to follow him to a night-time k’eex, a complex healing ritual in which payment is made to the underworld and evil winds are transferred from a person and his household to the earth and the jungle. K’eex translates as “exchange” or “transfer.” From Chac Neh we walked some seven kilometers to Coba village for a curing and healing ceremony at a rustic native household almost in the shadow—and behind the high back wall—of the Club Med. Before leaving his tiny ranchería, or settlement, at Chac Neh, Don Mech selected a bundle of siipilche’ branches from a bush growing in his yard, and from another, xi’imche’. I have already mentioned siipilche’ used in bundles during santiguars. Xi’imche’ is also a shrub, but the leaves are longer and narrower and come to a fine point at the end. Xi’imche’ leaves are often used to cover a mesa before laying out offerings Maya Shamanism Today and to dip into and sprinkle holy drinks during ceremonies. All along the way from Chac Neh to Coba Don Mech stopped frequently to show me shrubs and trees whose leaves had medicinal and spiritual properties. Nighttime came as we reached the town. A concerned father, sitting on a low bench in back of his house, cradled his sick baby girl as Don Mech set to work. By candlelight he fashioned a rough basket from strips of bark and into this he placed his bundle of siipilche’. Someone passed him a live chicken. Deftly holding the chicken’s body in one hand and its neck and head with the other, he struck the child with the chicken nine times sharply on the head (Figure 18). Then he went inside the house and, moving in the dim candlelight, struck each of the four main support posts another nine times. As he brought the chicken back outside, it died in his hands and he passed it over to a waiting family member. He repeated this with a second chicken and then he took two raw eggs and tapped them on the child’s head, again nine times, and did the same with the house posts. This time when he emerged from the house he put the eggs in the bark-strip basket with the bundle of leaves (Figure 19). In the darkness of the yard family members began the process of cooking the chickens, all by candlelight, setting a large iron cauldron over an improvised three-stone hearth, kindling a fire underneath. Don Mech focused on the child, who desperately needed a cleansing of evil winds. An elaborate santiguar was in order. Into a small ceramic cup Don Mech poured aguardiente, that clear cane liquor with power to cleanse. Then he broke open a cigarette and stirred tobacco into the cup with the liquor, making a dark brown solution. He sprinkled some of the tobacco and liquor mix on his bundle of leaves, then he and the father each took a small drink of straight liquor from the bottle. The father held the child while Don Mech lit a cigarette and began a long low murmuring prayer, brushing the child down with the anointed leaves, K’eex: payment to the underworld 42 frequently sweeping the bundle down the length of the child’s right arm. From his bundle of siipilche’ he then selected two or three leaves, dipped them in the tobacco mix, and rubbed the damp leaves in the sign of tiny crosses all over the child’s body; first on her chest, then her arms and hands, in the crooks of her elbows, behind the knees, on the ankles, the bottoms of the feet, and on her back (Figure 20). Intermittently he blew puffs of tobacco smoke at various places on her body. This process of sanctification he repeated three times, then the crumpled leaves went back into the basket. The atmosphere relaxed, bottles of Coca-Cola were passed around, and preparations got under way for the next phase of the k’eex. The basket became the central focus of activity as one of Don Mech’s helpers brought in a large unopened flower from a nearby banana tree. It was about ten inches long, somewhat pear-shaped, a light lavender color. Don Mech carefully wrapped it in newspaper and nestled it among the leaves in the basket. This, he told me, was the baby—an effigy in our terms. Then he wrapped fourteen coins, reales, he said, and put them in the basket. He cut a candle into seven pieces, wrapped them up, and likewise placed them in the basket (Figure 21). Don Mech carefully explained to me, in his broken Spanish, that the coins and the candles are payments to the ancient ones who live in the earth, so they will allow us to pass on the trails and roads. The ones who came before, he said, were bad people. They did not have God’s mandate, they did not believe in God, yet still today they are the proprietors of the underworld. We need to make invocations to them, we must offer them food. If we do not do this, we will encounter spirits in the night and they will cause harm to our bodies. After finishing our Cokes, Don Mech, two other men, and I got up and walked out back, away from the yard and into the forest about fifty yards. By candlelight, at Don Mech’s direction, the two men dug a hole Maya Shamanism Today in the ground about a foot and a half wide and one foot deep, for what purpose I had no idea. We returned to the house where the aguardiente was passed around before he added some more to the little cup with tobacco. The chickens were cooking in the outdoor pot and the pat-pat-pat from inside the house told me tortillas were taking shape. I asked Don Mech to describe a báalam, a spirit protector. They are four in number, he said, and they reside in four places. They make whistling sounds. They guard us and care for us and provide us food. They are powers of God. I asked about ceremonies and sacred breads. X-noj waaj, “great bread,” is for jaanlil kool and ch’a’ cháak. Chok’ob is the breadcrumb soup, and jo’oche’ is the main offering to God in the ch’a’ cháak. I talked to Don Mech about a waajil kool I had witnessed some years before in Becanchen and how the offerings were all laid out in numbers of thirteen. But there should have been fourteen, he said. “The fourteenth one is for the aluxo’ob,” the forest goblins and caretakers of the ruins. I read him some prayers I had transcribed from Becanchen as he listened intently. By around 9:30 the food was done and preparations began for the main event. Attention focused once again on the basket with the effigy child. It contained the “child,” the fourteen coins, the seven candles, and the eggs that had been tapped on the child’s head. To these he now added a can filled with all the inedible chicken parts. Don Mech and his helpers carried this along with a number of other items back out the trail behind the house. About halfway to where we had dug the hole, we stopped. He tied a rope across the trail from one branch to another about five feet off the ground, from which he suspended four pairs of food offerings, each pair consisting of one bowl with boiled chicken and a stack of tortillas, and a second bowl with the white corn drink saka’. A single long-pointed leaf of xi’imche’ protruded from the rings holding the bowls (Figure 22). K’eex: payment to the underworld 48 He counted the stacks of tortillas carefully. Facing the offerings, with one’s back to the house, the tortillas from right to left numbered twelve, thirteen, nine, and eight (Figure 23). First is thirteen, Don Mech explained, for God; then nine is for the Virgin. Twelve is for the apostles, and eight is for Kanul, or Báal, Báalam. I found out later that each pair of bowls was for a world direction. In his mind, he was placing the offerings to the east, north, west, and south. To the outside observer they hung in a line. Don Mech laid the basket on the damp, leafy ground, not directly below the food offerings, but a little to one side. He unwrapped the seven candles that were in the basket and carefully arranged them around the basket, four on one side, three on the other. He put the eggs in the can with the chicken parts and set it at the head, to the south (Figure 24). The cup of liquor and tobacco sat on the other end, to the north. Underneath the hanging food offerings he laid down a small board to serve as a candle holder, arranging five full-sized long candles so that four stood in a row, along the same line as the offerings hanging above, and one candle stood to the south, by itself. Four candles for God, he told me later, and one for Kanul, Báal, to the south. Don Mech dipped his bundle of siipilche’ in the tobacco and liquor solution and started to pray over the basket. He called up the father of the child to stand by him. In a low, almost inaudible murmur, he finished praying over the basket and then stood up, moving very close to the hanging offerings, facing them. Standing motionless with his head down, his lips barely moving, he prayed continuously for the next thirty minutes, a remarkable feat of non-stop oration (Figure 25). As the candles burned low in the deep forest darkness, the praying finally stopped. At the food offerings suspended across the trail Don Mech took a single leaf of xi’imche’ and dipped it in each bowl. He took down the bowl with the eight tortillas first, handing it to a helper. He took down the others in order, from right Maya Shamanism Today to left, or north to south. He pulled out the xi’imche’ leaves, one at a time, and squeezed them together, putting them in a bundle under a tree. His helpers untied the rope and carried all the bowls back to the house, leaving Don Mech and me alone on the forest trail with barely flickering candlelight allowing me to record the scene. When the men returned, Don Mech gave us all a good brushing down with siipilche’ freshly dipped in aguardiente. One at a time, he motioned us to step forward, where he gently turned us around counterclockwise as he counted the number of turns and passed the cleansing leaves over our bodies. He instructed each of us to light a cigarette as he kneeled down and gathered together the basket with the effigy child, chicken parts, eggs, coins, and the remains of the seven short candles. Carrying the basket, Don Mech led our small procession through the darkness, with cigarettes burning, to the spot in the forest where we had previously dug the hole. Into the hole, unceremoniously, everything went (Figure 26). Within a blink the men pushed the dirt over the whole assortment, burying it forever as sacred payment to the lords of the underworld. Quietly, without fanfare, we left our offering to the earth spirits and traveled back toward the house. The remains of the five tall candles were still burning at the trail site. As the men blew them out and picked them up, they talked fervently about how they burned, which ones were shorter than the others, and which ones burned evenly. These were signs in their own right, full of significance and meaning. At almost midnight, our task accomplished, we went to the house where bowls of delicious chicken soup and piles of tortillas awaited our consumption. The same food that just minutes before had been offered to the spirits was now providing human sustenance (Figure 27). Did the child get better? I do not know. I never returned to that particular household, and my work with K’eex: payment to the underworld 54 Don Mech was coming to a close. But I suspect she did. So much had been done for her. First Don Mech drew bad winds out of her and gathered them in the basket. Then he cleansed the entire house by tapping the four supporting posts with chickens and eggs. He sanctified the child with leaves and signs of the cross. He made food offerings to the night spirits on the trail and payments of candles and coins to the earth. All that was harmful in the house and in the child’s body was transferred—the true meaning of k’eex—back to the earth, accomplishing a thorough and properly executed cleansing of destructive energies. How could she not improve? I began this chapter by saying that Don Demetrio was a great and humble j-meen. Wide-ranging was his knowledge and famous were his skills. I say humble because he gave all credit to God. He talked to me one night at his home in Chac Neh. “A little chile, a little jicama, a little calabasa, camote, and macal: all that I plant multiplies,” he said. “Plenty is my food, rich is my life, because every day I work for God.” Don Mech passed away in the early 1990s. He had moved back to Coba by then, leaving his homestead on the old Maya causeway. His contributions were vast. There are many simpler forms of k’eex, but they almost always involve a transference of sickness from the patient to chickens or eggs. One j-meen explained to me that when he used eggs they served the same function as chickens, taking their place in the ritual. A point of high drama occurs after circling or brushing the patient with the chickens. The bird expires, dying right there in the hands of the j-meen, after having absorbed the sickness from the patient. Then the chicken or chickens are boiled and prepared as food offerings, often set on mesas with variously numbered stacks of tortillas. As for the eggs, they are thrown Maya Shamanism Today into the forest, smashed against the ground, or buried, as in the case at Coba. The simplest k’eex I ever saw was in fact done on me. At one point during an elaborate rain ceremony in a forest clearing, a shaman motioned me to come over to the mesa and he brushed me down with an egg. Then he gave it to me to throw away. As I reached out my hand to take the egg, he said “No! Use your left hand.” The right hand is for sacred things, the left hand is for contaminated objects. I took the egg in my left hand and inquired what to do. He pointed, “Just go out into the forest and throw it away,” which I did. What he had accomplished was in fact a minor k’eex imbedded within all the complexities of a rain ceremony. He did not want me tainting the event with bad winds I might be bringing to the service. Waajil kool/jaanlil kool: feast of the corn field My first opportunity to witness an indigenous Maya ceremony, as mentioned in the dedication, was in 1978. I recorded the event and published it in 1984 in Estudios de Cultura Maya. Later, at the University of California at Los Angeles it became my Master’s thesis. I am describing it here again because it is an excellent example of Maya agricultural ceremonies known as waajil kool, or jaanlil kool, “bread of the milpa” or “food of the milpa.” Milpa, as mentioned earlier, is the corn field—kool in Mayan. These rituals are also sometimes called primicias, or first fruits ceremonies, in which food from the corn field is given to the gods. They are a form of thanksgiving. I wish to take this opportunity to correct a very serious error I made in my 1984 publication. I said the shaman was responsible for conducting “non-Christian agricultural ceremonies.” I mistakenly thought there was a clear dichotomy between the Catholic rituals and the indigenous ones. I am sure Don Ramón, the town shaman and a devout practicing Catholic, would be aghast if he heard his ceremonies described as Waajil kool /jaanlil kool: feast of the corn field 58 non-Christian. I was wrong to call them that. The waajil kool I am about to describe took place in Becanchen, in the southern interior of the state of Yucatan, near the point where Campeche, Quintana Roo, and Yucatan all come together. On the day before the ceremony Don Ramón, the town j-meen, made a pot of báalche’, a sacred drink of fermented honey that has come down from ancient times (Figure 28). First he filled a pot half-full with water, then he broke up some cinnamon and dropped it into the water. Then he added anise seeds and more cinnamon, followed by about a liter of honey, almost filling the pot. He stirred the mixture with a piece of báalche’ bark and added three pieces of bark to the mixture. He brought it to a boil on his gas stove, then covered it and allowed it to cool. He informed me that fermentation now began. The brew sat until used the next day. As I began observing at 7 am on the day of the ceremony, preparations were under way in both the house and the yard of Luis Xool, a young corn farmer who was hosting the event. In the back yard three men were clearing brush with their short, hooked machetes (Figure 29). In one cleared area a table had been set to serve as the mesa. It was placed against a young tree so that the thin trunk was on the east side of the table. To this tree, facing the mesa, a crucifix was tied. On the table was the pot of báalche’, a cup, a pack of cigarettes, and two candles. From the cleared area around the mesa a short path led to a larger clearing where the pit oven would be located. Someone brought in a domestic turkey. Don Ramón poured báalche’ down its throat, thus sanctifying it before hanging it from a nearby tree (Figure 30). Two men cut out its tongue and as it bled to death they collected its blood in a small pail containing half a cup of salt. Helpers brought over four chickens and gave each one báalche’ before wringing its neck. The sacred drink purified the offerings, Maya Shamanism Today making them fit for the gods, or holy beings. The fowl were then taken to the house to be prepared for butchering. For the next couple of hours about twenty men and women were involved in preparations (Figure 31). I could not observe all the activities, but some of them were as follows: they dipped the fowl in boiling water, plucked them, singed them over an open fire, then skinned and butchered them. They collected the feet of the birds in a pile and put the heads in a pot. As the men continued digging the píib, or pit oven, they made a pile of stones as they removed them. Other men brought kindling and large logs to the area. Others brought green leafy branches. Women were busy at the house rolling up balls of masa and preparing the soup (Figure 32). They were also making saka’, the ritual corn drink. Don Ramón took thirteen cigarettes from a package on the mesa and placed them in a pile under the crucifix. He made thirteen rings out of vines that would support cups on the mesa and arranged them in order. Frequently Don Ramón went to the various centers of activity to direct and instruct the participants. He also supervised the placement of my tape recorder under the mesa and fastened the microphone to the front, where he would be standing. In the house area some men were heating long thick leaves over an open fire. They flattened the warm leaves and stacked them to be used later to wrap breads (Figure 33). Others were pulling long strips from other leaves to be used for tying the wrapped breads. At about mid-morning a pot of saka’ was brought to the mesa and Don Ramón put cups in all the rings. He poured báalche’ into the four corner cups and saka’ in the remaining nine, making a total of thirteen. A few men came and sat near the mesa while others continued their work. Waajil kool /jaanlil kool: feast of the corn field Don Ramón instructed a man, his assistant throughout the day, to light two candles and set them on the 67 ground near the thin tree that held the crucifix. The assistant then lit incense that he held in a small open pan (Figure 34) and I was instructed to turn on the tape recorder for the opening prayer (Figure 35). As the first prayer of the day began, the men in the area removed their hats; but otherwise there was no apparent attitude of solemnity or special reverence among the several men casually squatting or sitting in the area of the mesa. They chatted informally and smiled at my picture-taking while Don Ramón prayed. He prayed standing before the mesa, facing east. His assistant moved the burning incense all about the legs of the mesa. At one point Don Ramón dipped the báalche’ drink from the pot and sprinkled it in the air in four directions. At the end of the prayer he kneeled and spoke silently with his head bowed. Then he leaned forward and gently kissed the mesa. After praying, Don Ramón distributed báalche’ among all the men present and we all drank a little. The candles remained lit and soon the second prayer began. At a point during this prayer Don Ramón sprinkled the corn drink in the four directions (Figure 36). The incense was always burning, and again at the end there was the kneeling, the silent prayer, and the kiss. After this, he passed the corn drink around. There was no formality. Men came to drink and left. Don Ramón poured the cups of saka’ and báalche’ from the mesa back into their respective pots, then invited me down to the house. Someone brought the pot of corn drink for the women and children to drink. Near the back patio the soup was boiling and gaining color. Inside, the women were rolling balls of masa and flattening them into tortilla-like patties, but thicker (Figure 37). They passed them to the men who were making the ceremonial breads on clean mats. They made them as follows: First, they laid out four leaves (from the pile of leaves that had been heated and flattened) on the floor in an interlocking manner. Waajil kool /jaanlil kool: feast of the corn field Onto this they laid the first patty. They covered it with a spread of squash seed paste, sikil, made from the seeds of the calabash gourd (Figure 38). Over this they laid another and also covered it with the brown paste. In this way they built up the bread with layers of flattened masa and squash seed paste. The first bread had thirteen layers. This was special, they said, it was for Dios. All the other breads consisted of twelve layers. After all the layers were in place one of the helpers made four depressions in the form of a square with his finger on top of the rounded mass. They called these u yich waaj, “the eyes of the bread” or “the face of the bread” (Figure 39). Into each hole they poured a little sacred fermented honey (Figure 40). Then they plugged the “eyes” with masa and spread squash seed paste over the top. They wrapped the leaves tightly around the bread and tied it with the strips they had previously prepared (Figure 41). Making the bread loaves lasted about an hour and a half. The women were busy rolling the balls of masa, flattening them, and passing them to the men. The pile of wrapped, uncooked bread grew to about three dozen loaves. Occasionally Don Ramón passed around small quantities of báalche’ to drink. During this same period a man made what he called a j-weech, or armadillo, from thirteen balls of masa wrapped in leaves in such a way as to resemble an armadillo with protruding ears and a long thin tail, tied together with leaf strips (Figure 42). I found out later that the armadillo was a perfect instrument to carry offerings to the spirit world because it has nine stripes on its body, a sacred number. Thirteen and nine are the two most powerful and holy numbers in Maya counting, still true today as it was a thousand years ago. Final preparations were under way at the pit oven. Into the pit men put kindling, then larger branches of dry wood, then logs. Onto this they placed all the stones they had removed when they dug the pit. Just before noon Don Ramón lit the fire. As it burned and consumed the logs the heated stones settled into the Waajil kool /jaanlil kool: feast of the corn field When all the breads and the armadillo were wrapped and ready, the men took them to the pit and placed them among the hot stones (Figure 44). Then they covered the breads and the hot rocks with branches of green leaves. On top of this they laid some corrugated steel roofing sheets. The soil that had earlier been removed from the pit was then shoveled onto the sheets, sealing the pit, creating an airtight oven. There followed a period of relaxation as the breads baked and the soup simmered. As people came and went they shared the corn drink, passing around the cup. Most of the men sat in the area of the mesa, chatting and smoking cigarettes, but people also came and went freely in the yard and the house. An hour and a half later, when Don Ramón decided the bread was done, the yard got active again as men began to uncover the pit oven. Don Ramón removed the vine rings from the mesa, hung them on a nearby tree, and began rearranging the table. His helper brought three more candles and arranged them with the other two on the ground under the crucifix. Men removed the breads from among the hot rocks with the help of long wooden poles. They unwrapped them on the spot and spread them out to cool on a large cloth. They collected the thirteen balls of masa from the armadillo in a pail and carried everything over to the mesa. Don Ramón placed the special bread with thirteen layers on the east side of the table under the crucifix, a little south of center (Figure 45). He piled the thirteen balls of the armadillo on top of a twelve-layered bread near the crucifix a little to the north. On top of this pile he put certain turkey parts. He put the severed feet of the turkey near the center and placed the thirteen cigarettes beside them. Six ceramic bowls were set on the mesa into which Don Ramón put cooked turkey and chicken meat. Waajil kool /jaanlil kool: feast of the corn field The large pot of soup was carried over from the house. Don Ramón then poured soup into each bowl over the meat and arranged the bowls on the mesa, three on the north side, three on the south. Several men gathered around the pile of cooked breads on the cloth on the ground and began breaking them up, creating a large pile of crumbs. Don Ramón’s helper lit the five candles and began passing burning incense around and about the mesa. I was instructed to turn on the tape recorder and the third prayer began. It was 3:10 pm. Men continued working on the breads on the ground as the praying proceeded. Again at the end of the prayer Don Ramón kneeled, spoke silently, and made a kissing motion toward the mesa. Following the prayer, the men finished breaking up the breads, after which they poured the large pile of crumbs into the pot of soup (Figure 46). Hearts, livers, and heads from the butchered fowl were added and the mixture was thoroughly stirred with a pole, making a very thick soup known as k’ol. Don Ramón filled seven cups with the newly made k’ol and arranged them on the mesa, adding them to the six bowls left in place from the previous prayer, again making a total of thirteen. Then he set another bowl of k’ol in front of him to use for sprinkling to the four directions. The candles were still burning. Don Ramón’s helper once again lit the incense and the fourth and final prayer began. Part way into this prayer Don Ramón gestured to the pile of thirteen cigarettes, then paused and distributed them to those present. Some lit them, some did not. Near the end he kneeled for a short time while praying, then stood up again and sprinkled k’ol in four directions about the mesa (Figure 47). At the conclusion, he called over Luis Xool, the milpa farmer and head of the household, and instructed him to say his promesa, or pledge (Figure 48). Luis repeated the words of Don Ramón, gesturing over the mesa, offering himself and the foods on the table to the great right hand of God. When Luis finished, the praying was Waajil kool /jaanlil kool: feast of the corn field The food on the mesa was passed out to the men gathered in the area. The remaining k’ol in the pot was taken to the house area and distributed. There was plenty to eat for all. An estimated forty people, including women and children, consumed the food prepared that day. Don Ramón ate along with everyone else. As people were finishing their meal, Don Ramón went to the dying fire pit and sprinkled báalche’ in the form of a cross on the cooling stones. Then he went back and briefly gestured and spoke silently over the mesa. As people began cleaning up in the house and the yard, Don Ramón took down his crucifix and motioned to me to get my tape recorder and notebook. As we left the yard of Luis Xool late that afternoon, Don Ramón bade me good-bye and departed up a side street to his house. His work for the day was done. Corn, squash, honey, chickens, turkeys, incense, and tobacco: the fruits of nature and the products of agriculture had been offered to the spirit beings— both Precolumbian and Catholic—as gestures of thanks and payments for protection. The Xool family had completed its obligations to the supernatural world, thus assuring a good harvest and a year without sickness. Several years later I went to Hopelchen, in the state of Campeche on the west side of the peninsula, for the express purpose of learning how widespread these agricultural ceremonies were. I knew they were performed in Yucatan and Quintana Roo, but I had not heard of any in Campeche. Within three days of arriving in Hopelchen I was attending a waajil kool in the nearby town of Ich Ek. I observed some interesting variations there. When they made saka’, the white corn drink, for instance, they added nine ground-up cacao beans. They wrapped the loaves in palm leaves, suggesting that perhaps the Waajil kool /jaanlil kool: feast of the corn field 86 leaves for wrapping the bread did not have to be a particular kind, that people could use whatever worked. I witnessed the shaman at one point striking his own bare legs with sharp thorns (I did not get an explanation for this). They made no báalche’ for this waajil kool, and early in the morning, before the aguardiente arrived, the j-meen used bottled beer to sprinkle over the pit oven. In one of the most unusual variations, when some of the first breads were laid out on the mesa, the shaman lined up four girls on the south side and four boys on the north side and tapped their heads with a small bundle of previously-mentioned ruda, a medicinal plant. The children left before the main prayers began. The variations on the waajil kool or jaanlil kool are endless, but they revolve around the central theme of food offerings to the gods in exchange for protection. Unlike the santiguar and the k’eex that are for individuals, these ceremonies are for families and households. Spirits of the sky, forest, water holes, and sacred shrines are invoked and supplicated. Offerings are laid out on mesas, arranged in patterns based on sacred numbers and world directions. The shaman, the specialist who knows the proper prayers, invites the spirit beings to partake. The corn farmer, thus fulfilling his duty, feels assured and protected during the months ahead as he benefits from the help and sustenance provided to him by the invisible forces that shape his life. The shaman, as the practitioner who best understands these forces, entreats and appeases them on the farmer’s behalf, providing security and contentment in an otherwise risky and often menacing world. Maya Shamanism Today Ch’a’ cháak means to get rain or acquire rain. The cháako’ob are some of the most enduring gods in the ancient Maya pantheon. They date back at least 2000 years in Maya art and have their antecedents in Olmec religion. Today they survive as the personifications of thunder, lightning, and rain. Thus there are many cháako’ob, and only the shaman knows how to address them and petition them. A misconception widely held by outsiders is that the Mayas perform ceremonies only in times of drought. During one of my visits to Yucatan a non-Maya local told me I was out of luck as far as rain ceremonies were concerned because there had been plenty of rain that year and the Mayas would not be performing the ch’a’ cháak that summer. In actuality, based on my experience the ch’a’ cháak is an annual event held during the summer rainy season, drought or no drought. The rainy season begins in late May or early June, and as the first signs of rain appear the Maya farmers plant their milpas in corn, beans, squash, and numerous other food crops. The quality of life in a Maya village absolutely depends on the health of the corn field, and without irrigation of any kind, good rains are essential. The rain ceremony is a village-wide affair performed for the well-being of the whole town. One early morning in July, 1991, I left Valladolid for the site of a ch’a’ cháak at a cattle ranch near Yalcoba. We traveled by pickup truck east out of Valladolid for several kilometers, then turned north, arriving at the ranch about 8:30. The j-meen, Don Mario, immediately set about choosing a spot for the ceremony under some trees. His helpers brought a wooden table from the nearby ranch house to serve as the mesa. Then Don Mario constructed arches from twelve branches of xi’imche’, three fastened to each leg of the table. He made an arch on each side of the mesa and two more crossing in the middle, six arches in all. The green leafy arches Ch’a’ cháak: bringing rain represent the sky, and offerings suspended from them are specifically for the sky gods, the cháako’ob. Arches 89 of leaves are one of the hallmarks of ch’a’ cháak ceremonies. Don Mario sent some of us to a nearby k’o’op, a deep sinkhole where a steep winding trail took us to the bottom (Figure 49). There we cut bundles of banana leaves and carried them back to use for wrapping the breads and sealing the píib, the pit oven. At the mesa Don Mario was covering the surface with fresh green branches (Figure 50) and arranging cups of saka’, the white corn drink. He placed a crucifix on the east side. Two cups hung from the arch on the east side “in the sky,” and one sat on the ground by the northeast leg of the table for the jobon piixo’ob, another name for the aluxo’ob, the forest goblins. Using a large dipper, Don Mario poured saka’ into the cups, saying a short prayer for each one. All together there were thirteen cups, ten on the table, two in the air, and one on the ground. A fourteenth cup was filled and sent along with a sprig of xi’imche’ to the ranch house to be placed in front of the patron saint of the ranch. A large pot of báalche’ arrived—vino Don Mario called it—and was set on the ground. Someone had made it in advance of our coming. The mesa now had cups of saka’, a burning candle, a smoking incense burner, and the crucifix on the east side (Figure 51). Standing facing the mesa Don Mario began a long prayer during which he sprinkled saka’ from each of the cups using leaves of xi’imche’. He scattered the holy droplets all over the mesa, wetting the leaves until they glistened (Figure 52). A few minutes later he began a second long prayer, again sprinkling saka’. After this he and his assistants collected the saka’ from all the cups in a pail. He put a fresh candle on the mesa, replacing the used one, and filled the cups with fresh saka’. The cup from the ranch house was brought out, refilled, and taken back. Ch’a’ cháak: bringing rain Then began Don Mario’s third long prayer, but this time he knelt in front of the mesa and did no sprinkling. While he prayed, the small group of men around the mesa drank the corn drink from the first round of prayers. Afterwards, shortly before noon, they moved their activities to the bread-making area. The pit oven was already dug, a short distance away. From a large tub of sakan, or masa, the men rolled handfuls of dough into balls, but before flattening them they pushed dry sikil, ground squash seed, into the center (Figure 53). Then they flattened the balls in the usual way and began constructing the loaves, spreading thin sikil paste between each layer. The first bread was thirteen layers, jo’oche’, with a cross, an arc, and a point below the right-hand end of the arc pressed into the soft top of the loaf. This one was for ki’ichpam jaajal Dios, “beautiful true God.” The second bread had twelve layers with a cross and an arc, but no point (Figure 54). It was for ki’ichpam ko’olebil María, “beautiful Virgin Mary.” Then they made eight breads with eight layers, with a single point on top in the center. Finally, a single bread had seven layers and nothing on top. After they made these, Don Mario poured sikil into the tub with the remaining masa and mixed it thoroughly. With this he proceeded to construct one huge loaf, not with layers but just pushed and shaped into a very large round flattened mass. He made one large hole on top and filled it with squash seed paste. Then they made a second bread the same way, from masa in another pail. By this time someone had lit the píib fire and women at the house were preparing chickens. Don Mario began constructing cigarettes from locally grown tobacco that he had brought from town. He wrapped them and tied them in the middle with thin bark strips (Figure 55). “Chamal yuum cháak, yuntsilo’ob,” he explained, “cigarettes for lord cháak, the lords.” He made thirteen of them, of course. Ch’a’ cháak: bringing rain After the breads and the cigarettes were made he went back to the mesa and uttered another long prayer. 97 The same saka’ was still in the cups from before. He sprinkled as he prayed, again wetting down the leaves. About 1:30 he and his assistants emptied all the cups into a pail and washed them in clean water. He then filled each cup with báalche’, the fermented honey, praying as he poured, and carefully placed the cups one at a time on the mesa following the same arrangement as before; the two sky cups first, then the ten cups on the mesa and the one on the ground. A fourteenth cup went to the house. He put one of the hand-rolled cigarettes in each of the rings, ch’uyub, supporting the thirteen cups. Over at the pit, men were removing hot rocks in preparation for putting in the breads. Don Mario went there and sprinkled báalche’ in the form of a cross over the smoking pit. Then he went to where the women were boiling the chickens and sprinkled the cooking pots. Men began placing the breads in the píib as Don Mario returned to the mesa, now arranged with cups of báalche’ and offerings of cigarettes, and began to pray. The sky grew very dark and distant thunder rumbled. As he finished his prayer the breads were being sealed in the píib. He left the báalche’ on the mesa with the burning candle when we began preparing for the coming rain. Don Mario pulled a sheet of plastic out of his bag, as did the other men, and together we huddled near the front of the mesa as thunder, lightning, and a short heavy rain engulfed us. As we chatted under the plastic cover Don Mario told me Sak Babatun, the white rain god of the east, was angry. Then he asked me about other ceremonies I had seen. I told him about the waajil kool I had attended years before in Becanchen. “Jaanlil kool,” he corrected me, “and it is different than the ch’a’ cháak, right?” “Yes,” I answered, “for one thing they do not have arches.” “Yes they do,” he corrected me again, “but just one arch on the east side, not like here with arches on all four sides plus across the center.” Ch’a’ cháak: bringing rain He listed the principal rain gods: Kuumk’uh Lak’iin, the chief rain god, in the east, followed by Sak Babatun Lak’iin, Yuum K’an Babatun Xaman, Chak Babatun Chik’iin, and Yuum Éek’ Báalamtun Nojol— white in the east, yellow in the north, red in the west, and black in the south. Báalamtun resides in the south, confirming what I had learned years earlier at the k’eex ceremony in Coba, where offerings to Báal or Báalam were placed to the south. Babatun is undoubtedly the modern-day rendering of the very ancient and sacred pauahtun, the sky gods of Precolumbian and Colonial-period times that preside on the four sides of the quadrangular sky. The rare and venerable painted books show their likenesses and their associated colors, spelling their names in the hieroglyphic script. As the rain ended we came out from beneath our covers, shook off the plastic sheets, and went back to work. Don Mario added a new homemade wooden cross to the mesa and then said a short prayer. Báalche’ was still in the cups. He instructed the pit oven to be opened, the breads were done. He sprinkled báalche’ on the loaves as they came out of the oven, then together the men unwrapped them and took them to the mesa. Don Mario began arranging the altar. The thirteen-layered bread went to the upper right-hand corner, to the southeast. The twelve-layered bread went to the upper left. The eight-layered breads were grouped four on the left, three on the right, and the last eight-layered bread went underneath, for the aluxo’ob. The various participants brought extra candles, making five in all, and then relit the incense, bringing over the pots of chicken from the house yard. Men began breaking up the two large unlayered breads into crumbs, to be mixed with the chicken broth. The single bread of seven layers still lay on the mat on the ground where the breads had been Maya Shamanism Today unwrapped. “Ma’ tia’al jaajal Dios,” Don Mario said, “Not for God.” He put pieces of chicken on the various breads. His assistants made chok’ob, very similar to the k’ol I observed in Becanchen, made by mixing bread crumbs and chicken soup. Don Mario sent one set of offerings—a bottle of báalche’, an eight-layered bread, a cup of chok’ob, and some leaves—to a house at the other end of the ranch by pickup truck. Another bread with meat on top went to the patron saint in the nearby ranch house. The cups of báalche’ were rearranged and gathered near the center of the mesa with four in a row in front of the candles. He put a large bowl, leek, filled with chok’ob in the center of the mesa near the front and managed to find space for an entire pail of chicken meat. Another bowl of chok’ob went on the ground for the aluxo’ob. Finally, the lone seven-layered bread was cut into pieces and joined the others on the mesa (Figure 56). Getting ready for the climax of the afternoon, Don Mario called over two boys from the house. He sat them down, one at each leg on the east side of the mesa (Figure 57). He gave them pails half-full of water and put a plastic bowl in each pail, inverted so they floated with their bottoms up with air trapped inside. He instructed the boys to knock on the bowls with sticks, making a kind of “tunk-tunk” sound. Thus began the final and longest prayer of the day, with the water-pail drums reverberating throughout. Well into the prayer he tossed four cups of vino, the four that were in a row in front of the candles, to the four world directions, first east, then north, and so on. The prayer ended and the drumming stuttered to a finish. Done. Time for holy communion. Don Mario poured the remaining báalche’ from the mesa into a bowl, then he put a little chok’ob in a small sl, a tiny cup with a white cloth over it (Figure 58). The ranch owner kneeled first and Don Mario administered k’aam, communion (Figure 59). He circled the sl over the kneeling man Ch’a’ cháak: bringing rain 100 and counted in Mayan, hunp’ej, ka’p’ej, oxp’ej, kanp’ej, ho’p’ej, wáakp’ej, bolonp’ej, oxlajun, “one, two, three, four, five, six, nine, thirteen.” Then one by one all the men, and then the boys, received k’aam, communion. Afterwards we ate the cut-up seven-layered bread from the mesa. Finally the j-meen kneeled and his assistant administered communion to him. Next a rather elaborate t’oox, “distribution,” took place. Don Esteban passed out all the food to the men around the mesa and then had them line up on either side, all facing east. He tossed báalche’ in the air so that it rained down on the participants while he recited yet another prayer (Figure 60). He repeated this for the four directions, instructing all the men and boys to face each direction in turn. Finally, around 5:00 pm it was over and we feasted on delicious bread, chok’ob, and chicken. One by one the men slowly departed for their homes, carrying large quantities of food for their families. The young boys represented croaking frogs and their water drums imitated thunder. Frogs are an integral part of all ch’a’ cháak events that I have seen or read about, but the variations are numerous. In some cases four boys are tied to the four legs of the mesa, sometimes dozens of boys are grouped together, but in all cases they emit sounds like frogs. Sometimes cháak impersonators brandish wooden swords representing lightning. Another standard element for a ch’a’ cháak is the sprinkling of báalche’ in imitation of rain. In the case just cited Don Mario tossed cups of the sacred liquid high into the air, sprinkling the participants. Another variant has the cups of báalche’ hanging over the mesa and the actors pulling on the arches with thin ropes, shaking the cups until they spill over the offerings on the tabletop below—rain from the sky watering the four-cornered earth. Maya Shamanism Today 106 The reason for the croaking frogs and the sprinkling became apparent during a field trip I made in 1987. I was moving into the small town of Ticimul, southeast of Chichen Itza, to begin a six-week stay. On my second night in town, around June 1 of that year, the first rains arrived. It was nighttime and I was settling into my newly rented thatch-roof house when thunderclouds rolled in from the east. Lightning flashed and thunder crashed and rain poured down in torrents. The rainy season had begun. After the first front rolled through and the sound of thunder retreated to the west, the rain turned to a heavy drizzle. Then I heard the frogs. The noise became deafening, coming from all around. I took my flashlight, opened the back door of the house, and peered into the darkness. There all over the rocks and mud and tree branches littering the yard I saw tiny glistening frogs hopping about and croaking. They were only an inch long, but their cries were loud and piercing. The entire town reverberated with this cacophony late into the night. I realized then why rain ceremonies use croaking frogs. It is perfectly clear to any objective observer of the natural world: when frogs cry out, the rains come. Loj kaajtal: taking back the land Loj, in the verbal sense, means “take back, redeem, rescue.” As the noun loj it usually translates as “redemption.” In Maya ritual it often refers to redeeming a piece of land, as in loj corral for a fenced-in cattle pen, lojil kool for the corn field, or loj solar, for a person’s house lot. Even archaeological sites can be purged, as was done in the mid-1990s at Chichen Itza. In loj kaajtal an entire town is cleansed and reclaimed from evil winds, an expensive and complex ceremony rarely performed. Many towns make loj kaajtal perhaps once every five to ten years, in many more towns not at all. On Friday, July 12, 1991, the town of Xuilub, southeast of Valladolid on the Quintana Roo border, Maya Shamanism Today launched a full-scale cleansing of bad spirits from the entire community under the direction of Espiridión 107 Dzib, village j-meen and grandfather of my friend and consultant Damiano Dzib Abán. My own good luck was beyond reckoning. I had come for two weeks hoping to view a rain ceremony and instead witnessed a ceremony performed only once every five years! I followed Don Es that morning along a well-used foot trail leading west out of town. We came to a fork in the trail, at which point Don Es showed me a neat little trick—which has nothing to do with the loj ceremony but illustrates how field observations for the anthropologist never cease. There are always fascinating details to notice, to enrich our understanding of local culture. Don Es laid a thin branch across the trail to the right. Anyone following later—that is, any local attuned to the fine points of jungle traveling—would see the branch laid perpendicularly across the path and would know to veer left. (I am sure I would have just stepped over it, or on it, and not even seen it.) A short way past the fork, a clearing in the woods opened up, where a number of men were busy making ritual preparations. From appearances, work had begun at daybreak: cutting bush to make the clearing, digging the pit for tomorrow’s baking, and erecting mesas. Arriving around 8:00 am, I knew immediately this ceremony was going to be bigger than anything I had previously witnessed. No fewer than three freshly made mesas stood ready, constructions of recently cut poles; only bare wood now but soon to bear offerings and artifacts where humans and spirit beings alike would receive sustenance. In the center of the clearing stood the mesa mayor, the “principal altar,” also called the noj mesa, or “great altar,” roughly two meters square, oriented to the east. To the southeast side, at the edge of the clearing, stood a small low mesa about one meter square, referred to as chan mesa, “little altar,” and in the trees, also Loj kaajtal: taking back the land 108 to the southeast, hung k’atalche’, which translates as “sticks laid crossways,” made of just two long poles tied together and suspended about two meters off the ground. I saw a half dozen freshly carved wooden imitation machetes leaning against a nearby tree trunk. Don Es had come to make báalche’—so integral to Maya ritual since Precolumbian times—but here there was no honey. Perhaps honey was too scarce that year, or the townspeople had recently sold their harvests for dearly needed cash. Whatever the reason, the lesson is important for the outside observer, having to do with substitution and improvisation. Báalche’ without honey is still báalche’. Don Es poured three kilos of store-bought sugar into two-thirds of a pail of water, mixing it with a cup. Then he poured one pail of clear water into a hollowed-out log, after which he added the sugar water from the pail. He prayed quietly as he thoroughly mixed the solution dissolving the sugar. He added large pieces of báalche’ bark (Figure 61), spreading the pieces and pushing them down with his fingers to start them soaking. Since the bark tends to float, he put clean rocks on top to keep the pieces submerged. “All done,” he gestured. The rest of the day was spent in leisurely fashion—preparing the mesas, leaving and returning with supplies from town, and sitting around chatting. Around 4:30 pm the báalche’ began bubbling around the edges of the submerged bark, creating a white foam on the pale brown liquid. It was getting “hot,” according to Don Es (Figure 62). By dusk, the mesas were all in order, ready for a night of prayer and sanctification (Figure 63). The main mesa had a freshly carved and constructed wooden cross on the east side. In front of it, closer to the center but still on the east side, stood a holy green cross dressed in a white cotton embroidered shirt. It came from the altar of the rustic palm-thatched church in town. In the center a glass supported an unlit candle. Maya Shamanism Today 112 At the front, where the shaman would pray, were two large cups of saka’ each sitting on two small branches of xi’imche’. On the right side (when facing east) were four cups on seven xi’imche’ branches, and on the left side were three cups on six xi’imche’ branches. Counting the branches on the left and right sides, there were thirteen; counting the cups, there were nine. Numerology permeates Maya ritual. On the little mesa sat one large cup in the center and one regular cup at each corner. Each of the five cups had its branchlet of xi’imche’, and near the center lay an incense burner, p’uulut or p’uultil, made from a cut piece of banana tree trunk—wet and juicy to resist fiery coals that would burn the incense during the multiple upcoming prayer sessions. The k’atalche’, the two-stick mesa suspended in the trees, also had one large cup in the center and four regular cups, but in this case they were arranged two on each side in a row along the narrow poles, not quadrangular like the other mesas. Each cup had its xi’imche’ leaves, and the incense burner sat to the right. “What is this raised mesa for?” I asked. The answer was a classic lesson in Maya complexity. It was for the báalamo’ob, santo wíiniko’ob, yéetel santo cháako’ob; kan tts’ k’uh. This translates as “báalams, holy beings, and holy cháaks; four gods.” “What are the four gods?” I asked, hoping for clarification. “They water the earth,” Don Es said succinctly, as if that should explain it. Enough said. Three other cups set in hanging rings hung from tree branches, two together on the east side, one on the south. The two together were the jo’oche’ (the principal offering) and the offering to Virgin Mary; the one on the south was to Jesus. As night fell I began to experience eager anticipation mixed with underlying fear as I realized I was about to spend the night in the forest. To me this would be a breakthrough in doing field work, away from my house in town where a sense of security comes from having walls and a roof between me and the wilds. Maya Shamanism Today In an open hammock I had to trust Don Es and a few other townspeople who would stay all night in the clearing. As darkness fell, a large animal raced through our camp. To me it was a dark shadow, ominous. The men recognized it and excitedly identified it to each other, chuckling lightly. I felt assured. Then I wondered what I would do if it rained. Just before midnight I awoke to the stirrings of Don Es. He was getting out of his hammock and tapping his small flashlight to encourage its long-spent batteries to give up one more flicker. He shuffled over the damp leaves in the darkness, approaching the main mesa. From a large covered pail he scooped saka’, the white corn drink, and filled the cups, softly calling to his assistant to light the candle and burn cháal, a native incense. (The incense bought in town is not for the work of the j-meen, according to later interviews.) Cháal is a resinous substance made by wild bees to close the entrance to their hives. There are at least two varieties, ya’axich and k’antsak’, according to my notes. To use cháal instead of store-bought incense is more Itza, I was told, more in line with the ancients. Don Es picked up one of the large cups from the front of the mesa, along with the xi’imche’, and knelt on the ground holding it aloft. He commenced to pray. At the end of the prayer he used a single long-pointed leaf of xi’imche’ to sprinkle saka’ to the four world directions, repeating as he sprinkled, ox tées kulen kaab, “three times seated over the world.” This was for the three holy ones, Damiano told me later. It was pure Itza, he said. Finishing, he moved to the k’atalche’ where his assistant brought fresh coals from the dying campfire, put them in the incense burner, and sprinkled incense on the coals. Don Es said a prayer and moved on to the little mesa. He kneeled there, picked up the freshly stoked incense, and passed this native incensario Loj kaajtal: taking back the land over, around, and under the mesa, thoroughly cleansing it while praying all the time. That complete, he went back to the mesa mayor, where the incense was still smoking, and one at a time he picked up the big cups, now partially filled with saka’, and passed them around and through the smoke. Putting the last cup down, he again sprinkled saka’ to the world directions with a leaf of xi’imche’. It was five minutes past midnight (Figure 64). Don Mech, from Coba, had explained to me some eight years previously that midnight was the hour of silence, when prayers go straight to God. Damiano, here in Xuilub, told me the same thing. It is the time of least interference from man or beast. Even the birds are quiet. It is a calm, holy hour. We went back to sleep in our hammocks, awaking at first light. It had not rained. The first task of the day was to change all the offering cups from saka’ to báalche’, from the white corn drink to the amber fermented sugar water. From the noj mesa, chan mesa, two-sticks mesa, and the hanging offerings, the cups of saka’ were emptied into a common pail, replaced by báalche’ that had been fermenting all night. Recharged incense filled the air and a new round of prayers began as Don Es held high the two large bowls with their xi’imche’ leaves. Two assistants re-hung the jo’oche’ cups in the trees, but now with báalche’. More prayers, and then cups of báalche’ were passed around for all to drink. The population in the clearing was growing by the minute as people appeared on the path from town. One man came with a small pail of coffee and crackers for Don Es and me and said he would return later with food. Another round of prayers and sprinkling commenced at the three mesas as new coals and incense were stirred together. A man came from town with a bundle of new candles and replaced the spent one on the mesa mayor. Someone else showed up with more bark strips. Two guys went off to work on the fire pit. Loj kaajtal: taking back the land 116 Others left to go back to town. At 7:00 am there were twelve men in the clearing. New people showed up carrying wooden benches and a wooden table. A fresh supply of xi’imche’ arrived and Don Es removed the old branches from under the offering cups, placing fresh leaves in their stead. The exhausted leaves were piled on the east side of the clearing, at the edge. A plucked chicken, tied up and ready for cooking, arrived, then another. Then a new round of prayers. More báalche’ was distributed, and men arrived with bundles of fresh green branches for the pit oven. Four sacks of boob leaves appeared, very large, thick, round leaves used for wrapping food—then two more carved wooden machetes (Figure 65). Pails full of ground corn were dumped into a large steel tub. Sakan they called the corn, masa. Packaged sikil, ground squash seeds, was mixed with water and salt in a small pail making a brown paste. Two small plant bundles now decorated the mesa, ruda and nicte’ (May flower). When our breakfast arrived, Don Es and I ate sitting in our hammocks while a number of men began preparing breads on the wooden table. They rinsed the boob leaves in clean water and laid them on the table. A flattened ball of masa went on the leaves, then a thin spread of sikil paste, then more masa, and so on, until reaching the specified number. Don Es had little time to eat. As soon as each loaf was patted into shape, he needed to make the proper signs on top, and he continually answered questions from the bread makers: How many of this kind? How many of that kind? How many layers? They made one bread of thirteen layers, the biggest one. Then five breads of twelve layers. Don Es, with his forefinger, pressed the shape of a cross with an arc into each one (Figure 66). Four breads had nine layers onto which he made a cross with no arc but with two green leaf stems pushed into them. These, I Maya Shamanism Today found out later, were to mark the breads so they could be differentiated when taken from the oven. Seven-119 layered breads had a single cross but no stems. They made about thirty six-layered breads with a single indentation on top, in the middle. Don Es poured báalche’ into the markings on the tops of the breads over which he and his helpers spread sikil paste prior to wrapping the breads with leaves (Figure 67). I began to lose count as the breads were wrapped, tied, and stacked in mounds. After reaching the proper number, a new phase began. They combined the remaining squash seed paste with the remaining masa and mixed them thoroughly together. From this new mix the bread makers put together piles of shaped dough, but not with layers. They were wrapped in the same way and Don Es marked the tops, but they were clearly different. The breads with layers are tt or x-ttil waaj, while the breads without layers are the hostia used for k’aam, the “host” for communion. By 9:30 the breads were all made and Don Es and I rested while someone lit the fire in the píib. Others busied themselves making vine rings with bark strip hangers, preparing for events to come. In about an hour the oven was ready, the hot rocks were removed, and the breads went in, to be sealed by green branches and soil for an hour and a half of baking (Figure 68). Now, in a new development, the shaman began to include the whole town in the ceremony—not just the people of the town but the physical, geographical community. Don Es put little cups of báalche’ in numerous vine rings hanging from bark strips and instructed people to take these offerings, one to each jo’ol kaaj, or entrance to the village. On ten trails, all around the town, there are flat rocks placed to mark the entrances, each with a wooden cross. There was one right there near our clearing that I had not noticed until one of the young men hung an offering of báalche’ over it (Figure 69). Loj kaajtal: taking back the land Ten cups of báalche’ went to the ten entrances and five more went to the town’s five water wells. These 123 offerings were for the spirit protectors of the paths leading to and from town and for the guardians of the water wells, entrances to the underworld. After he sent out the báalche’, Don Es and his assistant began another round of prayers at the three mesas and then passed out cups of báalche’ for all to drink. The báalche’ bark had long since been taken out of the hollow log container and laid out to dry, to be used another day. Don Es returned to the noj mesa, or great altar, to read his sáastun. Holding the glass ball in front of the candle, peering into it intently, he announced, based on his reading, that it would rain in three days. Then there were more prayers at the noj mesa, and as usual he held up high the large cup and its sacred leaves. What came next, to my knowledge, has never been recorded in the literature on contemporary Maya culture. A group of young males went to the center of town, into the comisario, or town hall, and emerged as a mock military unit of soldiers and musicians. The “soldiers” marched with hand-carved wooden rifles and machetes while the “musicians” played snare drums, a bass drum, cornets, and even a conch shell trumpet (Figure 70). This noisy group of a dozen townspeople marched through the center of town to the clearing with blaring horns and beating drums (Figure 71). As soon as they arrived at the clearing Don Es gave each a drink of báalche’, soldiers first, then musicians. Then he arranged them into two groups, with any number of little kids running around as if to join them. The children, in fact, were a crucial part of the whole operation as I would soon learn. They were tying thin bark strips around their waists but I did not know why. After a long time getting organized, with new members taking up the wooden machetes amidst much talking, horseplay, and playful tugging, the two groups, each with its passel of kids, took off in opposite Loj kaajtal: taking back the land 126 directions—not on the paths or trails, but into the woods. I followed the group that went south, while the other group went north. As I had learned many times before in Yucatan, the locals travel through trackless bush like fish through water, while I, with my camera, notebook, and tape recorder went crashing and thrashing, collecting a good number of deep thorn scratches; but by the drum beats and bugle calls I had no trouble locating the group ahead of me. As I caught up with the group at one point I saw the boys chasing around and diving under bushes, coming out with lizards, worms, small snakes, and other critters that they tied up with their bark strips. One boy gleefully displayed three such creatures, holding them high. “Take my picture,” he implored. I did so, not realizing how critical the boy’s part was. I thought they were just playing around (Figure 72). From a distance across town we could hear the instruments of the other group. We were circling the town, it turned out, one group on each side, moving through the forest, encircling the community. Then we all met together on the main road on the far side of town, joining together into one large group. From there we proceeded to march together directly into the center of town where we paused to rest by an open well under an ancient ceiba tree. Two men with cups of báalche’ showed up and sprinkled the opening of the well using a xi’imche’ leaf. As we started off again, heading back toward the ceremonial clearing, they sprinkled another well along the way (Figure 73). Soon we arrived back at the clearing as the breads were coming out of the pit oven. Some forty people were busy preparing food. To my surprise and disappointment, the two groups of soldiers and musicians took off once more, again in two directions. I was surprised because I thought we had finished; disappointed because I was too exhausted to follow. My notebook was disintegrating from sweat and my temples were pulsing from the Maya Shamanism Today heat. My friend wiped blood from thorn scratches off my forehead. There in the clearing, around 1:00 in the afternoon, Don Es was directing a very complicated scene. Some fifty or more breads, hot from the píib, had to be sorted and stacked on the mesas. He personally arranged—or gave orders to arrange—cups of báalche’, cups of soup, branches of leaves, and piles of various classes of breads, not only on the three mesas but also in the hanging offering bags. On his command cups of chicken and báalche’ went out to the wells and the trail shrines. Finally, all was arranged in order. It was time for communal worship. Everyone in the clearing gathered around the main mesa and kneeled, encircling the altar (Figure 74). Don Es, at his position in front, facing east, raised up two small cups, sl, wrapped together in a white cloth. The cups contained báalche’ (vino according to Don Es) and the white cloth was tied with a bark strip that held two xi’imche’ leaves, one in front of the other to form a cross (Figure 75). He passed this, held high in the air, to his right. Each kneeling man took the cups in turn and passed them on. Nine times around the mesa they went, counterclockwise, or “to the right hand,” while Don Es’s assistant filled the air with burning incense. When the circling was completed, Don Es carefully balanced the cups, still wrapped in cloth, on the front edge of the mesa and proceeded to raise up the large thirteen-layered baked bread. This too he passed to his right and it went around the table nine times. That done, his assistant offered him communion, k’aam in Mayan. Unwrapping the two small cups, Don Es drank the vino and then his assistant broke off a small piece from the large loaf and placed it in Don Es’s open mouth. After that they changed places and Don Es, standing, administered communion to his kneeling assistant. Each of the participants in turn came around to the front of the mesa and received communion from the assistant, while Don Es, for his part, went to the chan mesa and the k’atalche’ to pray and sprinkle báalche’. Loj kaajtal: taking back the land 132 When all was done, it was time to distribute the food. The act of distribution is called t’oox and is as much a part of the ceremony as any other. Like everything else, it has to be done right. Don Es stood at the front of the mesa and passed out the breads to people around him. Men broke the x-ttil waaj into crumbs and mixed it with chicken broth in a large tub to make chok’ob or ya’ach’, two names for the thick bread soup. They broke the hostia, the unlayered breads, into halves and quarters and placed them on the wooden table. Men began to appear, bringing the offerings back from the wells and the trail shrines. Cups of báalche’ went back into a central container. Don Es began disassembling the little mesa and collecting the xi’imche’ branches. He sprinkled everything with báalche’ as he worked. The musicians and soldiers returned just in time to eat. By now, in this crowded sacred place, some seventy people—almost the entire adult male population of the town—were partaking of holy sustenance and putting large portions in their net bags to take home to their families. The once carefully arranged sacred breads on the great mesa were flowing out to the masses. Don Es made another reading with his sáastun. Based on the candlelight sparkling inside the glass ball, he pronounced that four novenas, or evening prayer meetings, should be performed during the coming week. His sáastun told him when to hold the novenas and for how many nights. There followed a long discussion by all present regarding the dates of the forthcoming novenas, and as the talk wound down each man in turn made his payment to Don Es (the equivalent of about 35 cents U.S. each). Don Es collected the money in a boob leaf and passed it up in the air, saying a prayer to bless the money before putting it in a plastic bag that went into his pocket. But we were still not through. As the mesas came down and the scattered oven rocks slowly cooled, we followed Don Es to the nearby Maya Shamanism Today trail shrine and then turned left, away from town. After a short distance we came to a wide spot on the trail, 133 and there, to one side, I saw a small smoldering fire tended by young boys. They were burning their lizards, worms, snakes, and whatever other assortment of creatures they had captured. I suddenly realized that the boys were not just playing when they chased after and caught these little animals. During later interviews and translations I learned that the lizards and worms were the carriers of evil and sickness. As the mock soldiers and musicians surrounded the town, battling bad spirits, the boys hunted down the little bearers of evil. At the end, they burned their captured prey. In doing so, the townspeople were in fact reclaiming their community from the creatures of the earth. The machetes and rifles were meant to kill anything they encountered, but it was better to capture them alive, Damiano explained to me. The militaristic music let everyone know they were coming. What were the women doing during this time? Danger lurked everywhere in the form of stirred-up winds. Women must not go to the wells during any of this ritual activity. As long as they could hear the drums and horns they had to stay inside their homes for their own safety. At the place on the trail where the evil creatures were burning, beyond the entrance shrine, Don Es performed ps, another name for santiguar. He brushed us all down, one at a time, with a bundle of siipilche’ dipped in báalche’. We had to be decontaminated before going back to town to be assured we were not accompanied by the little creatures of the earth. After we were all cleansed, a procession formed there on the forest trail. The musicians played, the soldiers marched, the church people carried the green cross and rustic wooden cross, and the whole group walked to drum beats and horn blasts, back to town, through its center, and into the church. They placed the crosses on the altar and four or five of the regular church singers kneeled and sang a Loj kaajtal: taking back the land 134 short selection of novena songs. The people dispersed, taking portions of food with them to their homes. The church singers put away their song books, the attendant extinguished the candles, and the musicians took their instruments back to town hall, thus ending two days of loj kaajtal. But the village had acquired serious future obligations. In the corning week they must hold four novenas in the church, as mandated by Don Es when he read his sáastun; and seven days hence they would cut another clearing, this time east of town, and they would once again bake breads, make báalche’, and offer prayers to the “holy ones,” performing a loj áak’ab or night-time loj (Figure 76), bringing a final close to this long and complex event. Religious duties never cease. This was a very involved loj, cleansing an entire town. I have seen a much simpler loj that was more like the waajil kool described earlier: a simple mesa, baked breads with specified numbers of layers, food offerings set out in numerical patterns, incense, and prayers. It was referred to as loj solar, the solar being a Spanish loan word for the Maya yard. One loj was even performed for an individual’s sickness, very much like a simple k’eex but without chickens or eggs. The boundary lines between classes and types of ceremonies are never clear-cut, and the loj illustrates this point perfectly. In the classification scheme used here, rites and rituals are arranged from simple to complex, and I have placed the loj kaajtal at the complex end of the scale because it is the largest and longest-lasting ceremony I have ever witnessed. Maya Shamanism Today From the simple to the complex, the events described here reflect a belief system widely held across the peninsula of Yucatan. Santiguars, using sacred leaves, cleanse people of bad winds. Divination allows the j-meen to see into a situation and prescribe remedies where needed. A k’eex makes payments to the underworld and transfers sickness out of individuals and back to the earth or forest. Waajil kool or jaanlil kool offers the fruits of agricultural production to spirit beings in exchange for health and good harvest. The ch’a’ cháak ensures bountiful rain for the corn fields by creating a miniature cosmos with a sky of leafy arches over a four-cornered earth and by combining the presentation of offerings with ritual enactments of croaking frogs, thunder, lightning, and falling rain; and the loj takes back or reclaims land from the bearers of evil winds and sickness. The gods and spirits of the Maya world are a constant presence in village life. The shaman’s work is crucial. He is the expert, the one who knows and the one who does. He serves the people, and when they trust him and when they experience the benefits of his practice, life proceeds with assurance. Fear diminishes and there is a sense of control over unseen forces. Personal experiences with the supernatural During my many visits to Yucatan I have experienced a number of happenings that are difficult to explain in rational, logical terms. To me they seem to be—or at least come close to being—experiences with the supernatural. I was sleeping in my hammock one night in Xuilub. The owner of the house had rented the front room to Maya Shamanism Today me and moved his family into the kitchen, a separate structure in back. In the middle of the night I awoke 137 to a loud crash against the heavy wooden doors in front of the house. It sounded like a rock the size of a baseball had smashed against my door. I bolted upright in my hammock and held my breath, staring at the door. It was motionless. The light from the street came through the space beneath the door and I looked for any movement or shadow. In that intensified state of alertness I listened. I saw no shadow, no movement, and I heard no footsteps. The owner of the house came in through the back. The noise had awakened him also. He went to the front door, opened the small wooden window, and carefully looked up and down the street outside. Nothing there, he indicated, and went back to bed without further comment. Eventually, as my heart slowed, I went back to sleep. The next morning I told Damiano what had happened and he said his brother had already told him the whole story. Damiano explained the event to me. Spirits, human souls, he said, travel around the town at night. They are souls that have not gone to heaven. Typically they visit houses and tap lightly on the door, tap-tap-tap, calling out in an eerie high thin voice, buenas noches! According to Damiano this somehow explained the loud crash on my own door. Personally, I have never been able to account for what happened that night. Another event, even more unsettling, happened in the same house. I always keep my flashlight directly under my hammock where I can reach it in the night if needed. Something woke me up—I know not what. I reached down for my flashlight but my hand touched something else instead. I jerked my hand back, wide awake. Then I heard a very light kind of shooshing sound, and I carefully reached my hand back down until I Personal experiences with the supernatural 138 felt the flashlight. I picked it up, turned it on, and pointed it toward the sound. There was a snake slithering away toward the corner of the room! I called out to the owner and he woke up and came in. I showed him the snake and he got his machete and killed it. The next morning, when I went out the front door, there were smoldering remains of a small fire where the owner had burned the snake. The family said it was deadly poisonous (but they say that about all snakes!). To this day I do not know if it was poisonous or not. When Don Es heard about it he performed divination to understand what had happened. The answer was this: someone had sent the snake to my house as a kind of test. Don Es performed santiguar to cleanse me and told me that if I remained with him, and worked with no other shamans, no further harm would come to me. Perhaps the most dramatic event occurred one day when I was recording Don Es doing divination on Damiano’s father, who had been sick for some time. It was very dark inside the house and I was using a flash on my camera. I had taken about ten pictures and was taking notes as usual when Don Es began to do a santiguar for Damiano’s father, but instead of using leaves he carried a heavy object tightly wrapped in a black cloth. One of the onlookers asked Don Es, “Why don’t you show Bruce the object?” He thought about it a second, seemed to agree, and began painstakingly untying the small knots in the cloth, finally showing me the object. It was a rock roughly carved into the shape of a jaguar, with eyes, ears, and mouth; it was a piece of archaeological origin. “Take a picture,” someone said. I aimed the camera, but when I pushed the button nothing happened. I checked to make sure I had advanced the film and tried pushing the button five or six more times. Nothing. Maya Shamanism Today “Come over here,” Don Es indicated. “Kneel down.” He proceeded to brush me down with the sacred object, praying as he did so. “Now you can take the picture,” he said. I stood up, aimed the camera, pushed the button, and flash! The room of onlookers erupted in oohs and aahs, my knees started shaking, and I fell into the nearest hammock to support myself. I was amazed. Of course all these events could have logical explanations, but why try to explain them away? After living in the bush for any length of time it makes more sense to blend with the people and the belief system that surrounds you. If the locals say these are manifestations of spirit forces, who am I to argue? One last comment People frequently ask me, how do you go into a village, how do the Mayas accept you, and are they willing to share this information with you? There seems to be something about the Maya character in Yucatan that makes the people remarkably open and generous to outsiders. If you try to speak Mayan, sit down and eat with a family, and maybe join in a basketball game at night, you will be welcome. Just show up in a town, go to the local store, buy a Coke, and start talking. The store owner is often one of the more influential persons in town and he or she can make arrangements to rent you a house or a room. I tell them what I’m doing: I’m studying the work of the shaman, u meeyjul j-meen, or I am writing a book about Maya customs, or studying chben ts’íib, ancient writing. In general they seem to be quite pleased that someone would tell the outside world about their lives. In actuality outsiders are no big deal. Foreigners may come and go—the Mayas abide. One last comment God hasn’t made room
My sister, you are a stranger to this place. Why be surprised that I know nothing? My eyes have never seen the rose, My eyes have never seen the orange. They say there is plenty down there In the good country Where people and animals and plants are never cold. My sister, stranger from the plains, Don’t laugh at a barefoot girl from the mountains Who dresses in coarse wool. In our fields and pastures God hasn’t made room for the rose, God hasn’t made room for the orange. I have never left my village and its nut trees. I know only the holly and arbutus bush And the leaves of green basil That keep the mosquitoes away When I fall asleep on the terrace On a warm summer night.”


The Brooch
Grandmother, grandmother, Since he left I think only of him And I see him everywhere He gave me a fine silver brooch And when I adjust my haїk on my shoulders, When I hook its flap over my breasts, When I take it off at night to sleep, It’s not the brooch I see, but him!
My granddaughter, throw away the brooch. You will forget him and your suffering will be over.
Grandmother, it’s over a month since I threw it away, But it cut deeply into my hand. I can’t take my eyes off the red scar: When I wash, when I spin, when I drink— And my thoughts still are of him!
My granddaughter, may Allah heal your pain! The scar is not on your hand, but in your heart.”


Mririda
People called me Mririda, Mririda, Mririda, the gaile rennet of meadows… With eyes of gold… But the rennet’s white chest I do not have Nor do I have her green tunic. Yet, like her, I have my ‘zrarit’, my ‘zrarit’ Which reach the sheep-folds My ‘zrarit’, my ‘zrarit’ Of which people talk in the entire valley And even on the other sides of the mountains. My “zrarit” which marvel, which arouse desire… Because ever since my first steps in the fields, I slowly took the agile rennet in my hands, And long pressed her white chest onto mine, And then onto my maiden lips. That is how the rennet gave me the marvelous virtue Of the baraka which makes her sing A song so clear, so vibrant, so pure In the Summer nights bathed by the moon, A song like crystal, Like the clear noise of an anvil In the resonant air that precedes rain… And thanks to the gift that Mririda gave me They call me: Mririda, Mririda… He who takes me will feel My heart beating in his hand As I often felt under my fingers The crazy heart-beats of the rennet. In the nights bathed by the moon He will call me Mririda, Mririda, The soft nickname that is so dear to me For him I will release my sharp ‘zrarit’, My strident, prolonged ‘zrarit’, That men admire and women envy, And such that the valley has never witnessed…

What could you offer me, tell me, young naïve man?Days without meat… sugar and songs,The sweat and the filth of painful labors,The manure of stables, stinky clothesAnd the frightful smoke of the dark kitchen,While you are out to dance the “adersi”.1And you would ask me, the thing is quite certain,To give birth to boys, boys, boys!Cannot you see that I am not made for it?

In dealing with Mrīrīda, a controversial woman of remarkable beauty,a Moroccan Amazīgh illiterate poetess, and one of the “victimsof historical assassination”, I deem it relevant to start with a personalexperience that has inspiringly been very influential in thewriting of this piece. A couple of years ago, on a Sunday evening ofFebruary 5th, during its Des histoires et des homes TV programme,the Moroccan 2M showed Kamal Hackkar’s road-movie musical documentaryTasanū, Tayrinū (2017).2 The title literally means ‘my liver,my love’, and it metaphorically refers to the confession of ardentemotions in the Amazīgh context of the Moroccan Middle AtlasMountains. In dealing with the concept of love in the Amazīgh background,Hachkar has based his documentary on the narrative of thelegendary poet Mrīrīda ūt-ʿAtiq. This mid-twentieth century local figuresymbolized la joie de vivre, freedom of movement and thought;and was an emblem of female resistance to the patriarchal order whoblurred the boundaries between shame and honor through her poemsand through her nomadic experience.Mrīrīda has her own story, which in varying degrees representsan early colonial and precolonial feminist awareness in Morocco, andwherein the oral tradition with its elusive memories, is overshadowed
by the powers of history and by the orthodoxy of the mainstream urbanmale-based elitist historiography. Her life experiences have beenobscured by those who wrote the glorious narratives of the country,without paying much tribute to the epics that unfolded around them.Mrīrīda, who speaks of and for the other Moroccan Mrīrīdas, remainsa valuable case of study. Her poetry and sung poems provide “a contestedsite where gender, morality, and the state intersect” (Ciucci2012, 788; see also Ciucci 2008). Her life narrative and poetic experienceare worth retrieving in the light of the intricate cultural, historicaland identity discourses her individual and collective subjectivitiespurport to represent. What we all know about her is that shewas born in Megdāz, a small ramshackle village that stretches theTasāout valley deep in the Atlas Mountains of Azilal, earlier in thetwentieth century. Unfortunately, her real name is still unknownto us; yet, the nickname given to her and by which she was famousin her tribe was Mrīrīda, as she herself states in one of her poems:“People called me Mrīrīda / Mrīrīda, the agile rennet of meadows”(Sadiqi 2003, 234).Literature about Mrīrīda’s little story is scarce, if not almost inexistent.Few webpages have mentioned her but with no insightful criticalreflections on her sung poetry. Nearly all the discussions raised ininternet public domains either reproduce the French translated versionsof her poems or hint to the overwhelming obscurities in whichshe has been drawn for long. Very significant, though, is that themysteries surrounding the narrative of this emblematic figure havebeen contested by few bloggers who discussed her case.3 They statethat she never existed as she seems to have been one of those mythiccharacters of the life dramas created for reasons that are still uncovered;and that if she ever existed at all, she only occurred in theFrench instructor’s orientalist fantasies. In here, Mrīrīda is meant tofade away from collective imagination, vanish naturally and disperseinto total amnesia. In the midst of the shifting discourses of intentionalfallacy and forced amnesia – visible enough in relegating this figureto second-hand position – and the recuperative endeavors of memoryin restoring the other’s forgotten history, crops up a wonderful storyof a fabulous female wandering poet. Her songs and poetry are nowavailable to us thanks to the French instructor René Euloge. In 1927-28, while on a visit to Azilal to experience the exotic Otherness andlive up to his Orientalist expectations, he discovered quite by chanceMrīrīda and her two other roommates. Bacha from Zāwit Echeikh and Bibia from Msemghīr were also courtesans and performers who usedto wander across the region’s souks and perform their musical poetryfor the Amazīgh Souk goers. A French soldier first urged Euloge tovisit Mrīrīda and the two girls. Euloge states thatC’est pendant une halte à Azilal que je fis connaissance de la jeunepoétesse. Mon regretté ami, Jo G… venu de Demnat me dit: “voustombez bien. J’ai fait pour vous une découverte. Ce soir nous ironsboire le thé chez Mririda. Ne m’en demandez pas davantage, carla rencontre vous réserve certainement une inoubliable surprise!”(Euloge 1986, 12)It was during an errand to Azilal hat I became acquainted withthe young poetess. My friend, o G… came from Demnāt and said,“It’s good that you are here. I made a discovery for you. Tonightwe will go to have tea at Mrīrīda’s. Do not ask me further, becausethe meeting is certainly hiding an unforgettable surprise for you!”Nobody cared about what these artists were singing and rehearsing.Whatever their artistic compositions meant, the French officers andthe regular visitors of the quartier réservé would not pay the slightestconsideration to the vague poems they could not understand. Suchwas definitely the case with the native taqāt goers, the merciless Gūmsoldiers,4 the merchants, the traders and the farmers, who were onlytaken by lustful moments of pleasure and missed the chance to lookat these Mrīrīdas’ poetry with approval and respect.The first Moroccan academic source to have mentioned Mrīrīdaand paid attention to her life story, albeit in passing, is Fatima Sadiqi’sWomen, Gender and Language in Morocco. She has analyzed the differentexpressive genres that women make use of in tamazīght andin Moroccan dārija, including some verses by Mrīrīda. She has found,and she is right, “creativity, boldness and moral strength” in the poemsof the “poor illiterate Berber woman living in a remote mountainousvillage at a period in the history of Morocco where women weredenied the least of rights” (Sadiqi 2003, 235). For her, Mrīrīda’s art“is a prototype of the authentic oral female literature of Moroccanwomen” (235). She excelled in the art of improvising and singingAmazīgh poems in a context wherein artistic production was singularlydominated by men. Sadiqi’s mention of Mrīrīda is an interestinghistorical and cultural act geared toward both voicing out the
Amazīgh women’s contribution to the reshaping of literary and musicallandscapes in the country, and exploring the agency of womenwithin Morocco’s cultural and linguistic “structures of power” (235)from both theoretical and ethnographic positions. Her project is avalid critical study at least in the overall argument it supports as tothe starting of a recuperative terrain that touches on women as marginalvoices and their contribution in the reshaping of postcoloniallinguistic and cultural identities in Morocco.Within the same vein, and in an article published in a conferenceproceedings edited by Sadiqi, Osire Glacier mentions in passingone of Mrīrīda’s poems. Glacier’s article focuses on the intersectionof power and on the production of narratives about feminism inMorocco, including feminist narratives themselves. Adopting an empirical-based approach, the study sketches the history of women inMorocco in general and Moroccan feminism in particular with theattempt of retrieving forgotten figures and narratives that articulateearly precolonial, colonial and postcolonial feminist consciousnessin Morocco. She argues that Mrīrīda’s voice contests the social conditionsof the women of her times, and that the discourse on modernMoroccan feminism is the continuity of an indigenous feminist consciousnessperpetuated through national and cultural traditions butoverlooked by mainstream literature (Glacier 2012, 47-63).Also, in dealing with Moroccan Amazīgh women, Cynthia Beckerwho has worked extensively on the Amazīgh women states that “womenare the artists in Amazigh societies: they create and wear the publicvisual symbols of Amazigh ethnic identity such as woven textiles,tattoos, and particular styles of jewelry and dress” (Becker 2006,4). Becker’s work, devoted to the Ait Khabbāsh from SoutheasternMorocco, remains a valuable theoretical source on the study ofAmazīgh women’s arts and culture regardless of its methodologicalshortcomings. It is not a book on Amazīgh arts in Morocco per se. Itis intrinsically descriptive of ceremonial and communal rites of passageperformed during women’s gatherings. By being so, it overlooksvarious historical and cultural factors that have been fundamental inshaping the Moroccan Amazīgh identities. In addition, the analysis“ignores the role and influence of Islam and religious ideology in theshaping of the mores and traditions the author attempts to present”(Hagan 2008, 341-2). Becker’s work’s merit lies in offering interestinganthropological data on the construction of ethnic identity in visualarts in the Moroccan Amazīgh context, and in investigating the roleof women in the maintenance and preservation of the Ait Khabbāsh’sartistic tradition. The merit of the book, concomitantly in line withthe argument of this article, also lies in contextualizing and theorizinga feminist discourse that allows the previously unheard voicesand stories to emerge against the constricting grid of national historiographicalwritings and elitist cultural documentation. In delineating counter-hegemonic and transgressive voices of themargins in Moroccan musical landscape, Deborah Kapchan has publishedher book Gender on the Market: Moroccan Women and theRevoicing of Tradition (1996). Kapchan relies on ethnographic researchthrough an in-depth fieldwork she started in mid-1980s inBeni Mellal to read the ‘body’ of the shīkhā, the Moroccan dancingwoman. Kapchan untangles the artistic and bodily prowess ofthe shīkhāt (plural of shīkhā) in articulating some of the more powerfulmetaphors of Moroccan Arabo-Amazīgh identity. For her, thisfemale performer whose singing and dancing are central to all festivities,including marriage ceremonies and birth and circumcisioncelebrations, represents a model of the transgressive female dancerin Moroccan society. Her study, which comes in the form of encounterwith and analysis of conversations with the dancers, illustratesvarious discourses on women’s performances in an Islamicsociety. It highlights the ways in which the performers’ identitiesare negotiated within complex discourses of sexual freedom, socialmarginalization and moral ideals. Focusing on the shīkhā’s body asa palimpsest of erotic inscriptions, Kapchan declares that the animatedsite of these dancers’ physical activity and their sexually loadedspectacles make them “embodiments of the matluq” (Kapchan1994, 87) with unlimited freedom that violates the borders of socialrestraint. The free and unrestricted shīkhā is accepted as “garrulousand outgoing”, incarnating a sexual texture of “exhilarationand flowing movement” (94). These dancers’ openness in performingsexual prowess through the manipulative forces of the body, theirbodily and linguistically “loose language” on and off stage, defy religiousand cultural taboos. They bear witness of the dishonorablecharacter of the dancer/singer in the “dominant value system thatdegrades their material and spiritual worth” (96). One of the limitationsof Kapchan’s work is that it foregrounds the manipulation ofthe discourse on women within the Orientalist mode of representationthat focuses on the definition of female voices as forms of patriarchaldomination and oppression. It does not provide a genuine understandingof Moroccan/Oriental women beyond the confinementsof tradition, and beyond the discursive constructions of Orientalistlegacy complicated by the ethnographer’s position. Still, Gender onthe Market offers an interesting study of the Moroccan marketplaceas a contradictory site of linguistic and bodily interactions wherevarious discourses about gender, tradition and values are constructedand experienced through women’s daily practices. The evocativeforces of the marketplace in Mrīrīda’s case are very telling. It standsas an oratorical space wherein the expressive forms and beliefs ofthe traditional realm are revealed and wherein this poet is in constantcontestation of social categories and continuous challenge ofgender boundaries. This is also true for some Moroccan Amazīgh women who are seenas agents of oral tradition wherein various discourses about genderedspaces and traditional formulations of social authority are negotiatedand reconstructed. Within this vein, the case of Mrīrīda ūt-ʿAtiqis significant. She managed to impose the authority of her physicalpresence and enforce her voice in both the public and private spheresthrough a type of oral texts she created and sung during her nomadicjourneys across the various spaces she had physically and imaginativelyvisited. Curiously, the presence and contributions of MoroccanAmazīgh women in oral tradition have largely been unrecognized inhistorical writings, and their physical and epistemological experienceshave also been scarcely tracked in the academic groves. Thisis a lacuna that this piece hopes to fill through the interrogation of“history from below” as Rosalind O’Hanlon has put it. The endeavorto rescue the voices and stories of these women from oblivion andrestore the left-out fragments of history is of critical importance; aprocess that “turns an absence into a presence and peoples vacantspaces with figures” (O’Hanlon 2000, 79).1 Gendering Colonialism and Colonizing Gender: Reflectionson Mrīrīda nʾait ʿAtiq’s Encounter with René EulogeDespite ūt-ʿAtiq’s contribution in the remapping the MoroccanAmazīgh cultural landscape through her poetry, she has, nonetheless,gone unnoticed, and her influences have been put into oblivion bythe annals of national historiographical writings. Her achievementshave been weakened and neglected because of her illiteracy andlack of intellectual pedigree, and because of her ethnic and genderaffiliations as an Amazīgh woman. As stated earlier, Euloge had thechance to know and meet ūt-ʿAtiq on various occasions and for severalmonths. The encounter reminds us of Flaubert and his Egyptiancourtesan, kuchuck Hanem. Stimulated by a set of romantic imageswhich had fueled up his imagination about oriental fantasies and theOther’s unexplored geographies, like Flaubert himself, Euloge movedto one of the most marginalized zones of the country to experiencehis European “collective day-dream of the Orient” (Said 1979, 52).During the encounter with his courtesan, he states that In listening to her singing about the mountains and valleys, aboutthe village’s everyday life, her family’s dramas, her joys and sorrows,I was almost convinced that at that unmatched moment shehad reached the highest rise in thoughts and feelings and, in theoutburst of her lyrics, a kind of intoxication transfigures her byalleviating her from worldly miseries.In here, Euloge is keen in grasping the stock motifs and concerns ofMrīrīda’s poetic experience at large. He admits that the creative potentialof his poetess inscribes her within a highly refined poetic artand hints, albeit implicitly, to her linguistic ability in crafting andtranslating everyday tribal issues into sophisticated poetic diction.The powerful meanings that her poems/songs resonate with elevateher from earthly physical spaces up to a subliminal universe whereinshe becomes possessed by the atemporal spell of the words she uses.Euloge’s perceptive impressions attest to the artistic flair his courtesanis endowed with and refers to how she polishes up her words togive a more captivating veneer to the overall thematic concerns she explores.Mrīrīda handles the trepidations and tribulations of the villagelife to give way to a poetic sagacity about her own physical and epistemologicalnomadic experiences. Her poems, accordingly, are astuterevelations about individual and collective experiences wherein theroughness of the mountains and valleys is tamed by the graceful sensitivenessof the poetess’s feelings. These poetic motifs construct thetextual fabric of her individual narrative as the case with the translatedpoem that I discovered while writing this piece, titled “The Brooch”and which talks aborted desires due to expatriation in a foreign land:Grandmother, grandmother,Since he left I think only of himAnd I see him everywhere.He gave me a fine silver broochAnd when I adjust my haïk on my shoulders,When I hook its flap over my breasts,When I take it off at night to sleep,It’s not the brooch I see, but him!My granddaughter, throw away the brooch.You will forget him and your suffering will be over.Grandmother, it’s over a month since I threw it away,But it cut deeply into my hand.I can’t take my eyes off the red scar:When I wash, when I spin, when I drink –And my thoughts are still of him!My granddaughter, may Allah heal your pain!The scar is not on your hand, but in your heart.
Coming back to Mrīrīda-Euloge unremitting connection, Mrīrīda’s interestin Euloge, if there might be any, given her ways of understandinglife in a bohemian-like manner, complicates the discourse of encounterof the French male visitor with his Oriental subject. It is truethat the encounter occurred under conditions of asymmetrical powerrelations; the French visitor is white, knowledgeable, civilized andrich enough with a civilizing mission in mind, whereas his courtesanis a supposedly submissive Oriental object available for the Westernmale’s fantasies and sexual promiscuity. Yet what we discover is thatMrīrīda’s powerful presence through her pristine poetic imaginationin manipulating human experiences and turning them into refinedaesthetic constructions and symbolic poetic imageries fluidly dissolvesand disbands Euloge’s position as an Orientalist ethnographer.Euloge has not felt at any moment the need to describe how far shewas oriental; and this is quite apparent all the way through his prefaceto ūt-ʿAtiq’s collection of poems. Furthermore, he seems to haveoverlooked, and this is one of the constraints of translation, the realmeanings behind Mrīrīda’s poems and songs. He might not havepaid attention to one of her poems where she vehemently condemnshis presence, and by extension the colonizer’s, and implores him totake a quick leave back home (see the extract below). In here, it isclear that Euloge’s courtesan was aware of the dangers of colonial encroachmentand her involvement in resisting its premises is quite evident.To my own understanding, the founding figure of this feministanti-colonial awareness in Morocco is accredited to Malika al-Fassi’swritings (1919-2007), one of the urban elites that has found its waythrough the annals of Moroccan official history on national struggleagainst colonial presence. Moroccan history is yet replete with absencesof figures from the unfathomable Morocco that are condemnedto remain silenced including ūt-ʿAtiq herself, whose poetry that has violentlybeen neglected on aesthetic, ethnic and elitist grounds, articulatedan early feminist consciousness about national integrity and liberation.Despite the significance of these figures’ contributions to themaking of Moroccan history, contemporary scholarship on this criticaltopic is still lagging behind, producing more absences where thereshould be a serious engagement with little narratives about the ironiesof history. This is an issue that begs for future research investigation.In a satirical tone where images speak about themselves in clearerterms, and with depth of meanings through impressive and allegoricalovertones that are both liberating and insightful, Mrīrīda says:For you, you, it will be better for youIf you go back to your countryI know that you frequently have to swap your girlfriendsYou accept any keyBecause you are like an old wooden lock. (Euloge 1986, 75)
Euloge is relegated to a passive, if not frail, position by the poetess’sauthority and her sense of freedom to reveal her rebellious voice andvibrant passion. We feel that Euloge’s voice is totally confiscated andrepossessed by the spontaneous fascinating poetic skills of his courtesan,and by her instinctive drive in translating her individual andcommunal anxieties into poetic expression through the creative linguisticstructures of her native language. The importance of lookingat gender when exploring issues about coloniality and colonialdifference is significant as it provides the possibility of delineatingalternative forms of Orientalism (Porter 1994, 150-4). The orientalisttemplate of encounter upon which colonial difference is constructedin the case of Euloge and his Moroccan courtesan becomes vulnerableto reversal.The encounter of Euloge with Mrīrīda entails a discussion on colonialcontacts through the manipulative forces of Orientalist discourse.In his Orientalism, and with the Foucauldian notion of discoursein mind, Edward Said defines orientalism as a “western stylefor dominating, restructuring, and having authority over the orient”(1979, 3). He also tells us that “the Orient seems still to suggest notonly fecundity but sexual promise (and threat), untiring sensuality,unlimited desire, deep generative energies” (118). The colonial encounterin the Maghreb was incontestably a sexual encounter as well.Colonies, viewed as contradictory terrains where “cultures, sexualities,bodies, fantasies, and politics meet and emerge more complexfor having encountered one another” (Mullins 2002, x), often wereseen as sanctuary sites providing sexual prospects and bodily pleasuresaway from the authoritarian sexual codes that regulated individualrelations in the metropolitan centers.Following Edward Said’s critique of Orientalism, scholars from awide range of disciplines explored the ways in which other peopleand places have been constructed in colonial imagination (Aijaz 1992;Alloula 1986; Kabbani 1986). The traditional image of the MiddleEastern and North African woman that has dominated Western imaginationfor long is that of an oppressed, sexualized, eroticized andexoticized object. She is controlled by patriarchal and religious institutions,and often made limitlessly available for the Western male’ssexual gaze. Such model of the Oriental woman as a ‘non-isolated instance’,which discursively hammers on Mrīrīda’s case and disturbsand disorients the template of Orientalist discourse, is clearly delineatedin Gustave Flaubert’s encounter with Kuchuk Hanem, the latenineteenth-century famous Egyptian courtesan and dancer.The discursive prowess of both cases lies in the fact that they expressthe gendered shifts in Orientalist constructs. They reveal ideasabout images of European stereotypical discourse about Orientalsexuality and the preconceptions associated with cultural, sexualand textual encounters between the male visitor and the oriental woman. Yet, above all, the discursive power of such representationis in the systematic association between the Oriental woman andthe concept of colony, as a vulnerable land awaiting the Westerner’sconquest. René Euloge and Gustave Flaubert, who were both Frenchmales speaking from a position of authority, received the Orient asa haven of exoticism wherein their heterosexual desires could be inscribed.They aimed to possess their subjects physically, control anddominate them in a situation that “stands for the pattern of relativestrength between East and West, and the discourse about the Orientthat it enabled” (Said 1979, 6). According to Edward Said, Flaubert’s Hanem underscored a viewof the Orient as a site of feminine decadence and a “seemingly unboundedsexuality” (178). She is totally possessed and controlled bythe undissipated French male visitor. She “never spoke of herself,she never represented her emotions, presence, or history. He spokefor and represented her” (6). In interrogating the grand narrativesof colonialism, Said’s Orientalism fails to produce an alternativeformation of the Other. His theorization of the “operations of powerin colonial relations leads him, in the first instance, to take insufficientaccount of resistance or contradiction within imperial cultureitself” (Moore-Gilbert 1997, 50), and he is caught in an endlessprocess of reinscribing the “very forms of cultural essentialism forwhich [he] condemns Orientalist discourse” (50). Other critics notethat he places too much emphasis on the passivity of the native whilenot discussing, or even allowing for, the diverse ways in which indigenouspeople of the East have used, manipulated and constructedtheir own positive responses to colonialism using Orientalist conceptions(Beinorius 2003, 149-65). Said, accordingly, focuses on theepistemic transgressions of Empire rather than on the resistance ofthe oppressed. His model has not only been criticized for theoreticaland methodological shortcomings, but also for an incisive obliterationof “the voice of the very agents he is so keen on liberating”(Bekkaoui 1998, 32).However, this intricate case in Mrīrīda-Euloge encounters revealsvarious discursive manifestations that foreground the Oriental womanas a defiant subject with unbounded freedom of movement and speech.Her poems which swing back and forth in emotions of sadness and joy,indifference and compassion, incarnate an individual self in quest forself-expression, identity assertiveness, and broader horizons of nomadiccreativity and physical wandering. Thus, in so doing, Mrīrīda seemsto be contesting “the mainstream historical theories that regard womenas passive absorbers of orders” (Sadiqi 2003, 239).5 Her life experienceprovides a genuine case about the understanding of Orientalwomen beyond the confinements of tradition, and beyond the discursiveconstructions of Orientalist legacy whereby Moroccan women’sexperiences seem to be narrated within a homogeneous discourse ofvarious social and sexual constructs that are endorsed and complicatedby the mainstream narratives of colonial history If Flaubert’s Hanem was “no more than a [sex] machine”, and to acertain extent “less a woman than a display of impressive but verballyinexpressive femininity” (Said 1979, 187) – a fact that denies heraction and voice –, Euloge’s Mrīrīda articulates a counter-discourseof subversion that challenges the cultural and ideological hegemonyof the Western male’s gaze and its discourse on identity and difference.She resists the constricting grid of representation by being the‘master’ of her own narrative as an Oriental woman endowed withsubstantial feminine potential wherein her agency is affirmed andher pristine poetry remains an intrigue to the French visitor. She ismade visible through her poems and not through Euloge’s representationalcategorizations of how she was oriental. She has managedto speak about herself and express her identity and belongingnessthrough her intuitive power of creativity and expressive forces ofpoetic reflection. If in Orientalist writings Oriental women are moreoften than not “the creatures of a male power-fantasy” as they are“more or less stupid, and above all they are willing” (207), Mrīrīda’sencounter with Euloge reverses this template and inscribes her withina much more dynamic discourse of resistance wherein the Frenchinstructor has been primarily concerned with her unimaginable abilityin weaving her poems without being fully interested in describingher as an oriental type to Western readers.In other words, Mrīrīda’s power detectable enough through thechoice of words and poignant thematic concerns for her poems disengagesthe instructor’s male’s gaze and underscores the reversal ofthe Orientalist stereotypes about Oriental women. The deeply-rootedstereotype of Muslim women confined by the patriarchal ordersof oppression, wherein their voice is ultimately denied while waitingfor the Western male to bring salvation, is totally undermined.Sexual liaison through physical pleasure and the unlimited sensualityin Kuchuk Hanem’s case with Flaubert contrasts in meaningfulterms the intrigues of poetry crafting and poetic crudeness ofMrīrīda in Euloge’s case of encounter with the Atlas courtesan. Thissituation turns back the old specter of Orientalist ideology on itselfand offers an interesting perspective as to how gendered encountersin the historical context of French colonialism on Morocco have beenconsidered and rethought.Just like Kuchuk Hanem in the case of Flaubert, Mrīrīda, who wasunable to adjust herself to the taqāt’s mysteries wherein she coupledphysical satisfaction with dignity and poetic sensibility, had to disappearin order to be resurrected more completely. After the SecondWorld War, re-driven by an immortal Orientalist desire in the revivalof his exotic experience after a momentary break, Euloge cameback to look for the courtesan he would never be able to see again.As he himself tells us, En 1954, le hazard, dernier et premier des dieux, me permet derencontrer prés d’Ait Ouariat chez les Ait Bou Ou Guemmêz, unemontagnarde que les années avaient sévèrement marquée, mais robusteet souriante… Une quinzaine d’année auparavant, au marchéd’Azilal, elle avait été l’une des collègues de Mririda, la “tanedamt”,la poetesse “qui choisissait ses amants”… la courtisane retiréedes affaires m’apprit que Mririda avait quitté le souk hospitalierpour vivre dans une intimité sans partage avec G.., adjudant desGoumiers. Plus tard elle aurait eu maille à partir avec un Caid dela région et le sergent S. l’emmena alors au poste de Taguelft et enfit sa compagne pour quelque temps (Euloge 1986, 15)In 1954, the first and last chance from the Gods allowed me to meetcloser to the Ait Ouariat at the Ait Bou Ou Guemmêz, a healthyand smiling mountainous woman, although she had severely aged.About fifteen years before, in the Azilal market, she had been oneof Mririda’s colleagues, the “tanedamt”, the poetess “who choseher lovers”… this courtesan who backed out of the business toldme that Mririda had left the generous souk to live in unshared intimacywith G., an assistant of the Goumiers. Later she refusedto yield to a Caid from the region, and Sergeant S. took her to theTaguelft post and dated her for some time.As this extract delineates, in his relentless quest for his lost courtesan,and upon an unforeseen encounter he struck with an old womanfrom the Ait Ouariāt in the Ait Bouguemāz tribes in 1954, Eulogetells us that this “retired courtesan” knew Mrīrīda as they bothshared the mysteries of taqāt and those of its goers. She was a colleagueto tandāmt, the poetess, “who was keen in choosing her lovers”.She told him that she left Azilal to live in “unshared intimacy”with a local chief army officer. Later, as she refused to yield to thelustful desires of an authority officer, a sergeant major had to takeher to an army garrison in Taguelft, a village in the upper parts ofthe nearby mountains, and dated her for some time before she completelyvanished.Mrīrīda’s poems that are available to us are René Euloge’s Frenchtranslated versions. Many of her verses and sung poetry in their originalAmazīgh language are now lost to us. If there remains any, theyare only fragmented pieces from various poems, or at worst full poemswith incomplete structure. This is due to the forces of age over thepeople who lived with this distinguished artist and learnt her songs/poems, and to the workings of time over the nature of the transmissionof an oral genre that is vulnerable to the dangers of extinction.The translations offered by Euloge’s Les Chants de la Tassaout tomore than a hundred poems cannot capture by any means the intricateimages and metaphors the poems purport to convey in their orig- inal language. Euloge himself tells us in the preface to his book that“the most faithful translation fails to fully restore the flavor of suchpoetry”. He is definitely right. Furthermore, it is certain that the retranslationof Mrīrīda into English would distort, disorient and deformher work further, and do harm to the poetess’s intended meanings; anotherinjustice that runs through the discursive implications of culturaltransfer and the relocation of languages transmitted through oralityin the case of Moroccan women’s little known narratives.In spite of all the constraining complications that generally surroundliterary translations, and particularly the translation of vernacularlanguage, Amazīgh poetry as a case in point, Euloge’s translatedcollection of poems has at least saved Mrīrīda from oblivionand has perceptibly, albeit to some extent, succeeded in bringing outthe concealed meanings in the aesthetic fabric of her texts. Mrīrīdahas addressed various themes in her songs, mainly the body and itsshifting discourses as a woman’s concern in a tribal context, the representationof the woman and the images such (mis)representationperpetuates in a male-oriented society, and the human relations thatemanate from gendered spaces in the Amazīgh context. Through variouspoems, we witness the poetic interplay of the body with the colonialexperience and the counteracting resistance that emerges inthe precincts of Mrīrīda’s text. Through one of the translations of herpoems titled “The Bad Lover” she states,Leave me, soldier without sense or manner!I can see that you are full of contempt,Your hand raised, insults on your lips,Now that you have had what you want from me.And you leave, calling me a dog!Sated with my pleasures,You’d have me blush for my trade,But you, were you ashamedWhen you pushed gently at my door,Up like a bull? […]Guest of mine for the moment, my slave,Don’t you feel my disgust and hate?One of these daysThe memory of tonight will bring you back to meConquered and submissive again.You’ll leave your pride at the doorAnd I’ll laugh at your glances and your wishes.(Joris, Tenghour 2012, 513)Mrīrīda composes as she sings and sings as she composes; stringingher words and tying up her poetry pieces together with powerful expressionsand images borrowed from everyday experiences, as if she were stringing the Amazīgh lūbān laces6 (amber stones) to put aroundher neck and ornate her body. Her nimbleness and skillful imaginationin assembling words and composing/singing through metaphors,simile and satire have conspicuously singularized this poet’s artisticcreativity; thus, acquiring the seal of a tanẓāmt (professional poetess).In her poems, she deals with the exasperating pains of love,unhappiness and departures that yield melancholic poetic aura; realand imagined situations contemplative of issues about her individualand collective experiences such as separation and loneliness, unreciprocatedlove, gossiping, betrayal, death, etc. Part of her poetry,related to or induced by ardent sexual desires, involves well-knittedmotifs and images that are stringed in a romantic fashion as is thecase her “What do you want?”:What do you want, girl of the village below?To marry me, is that what you are thinking?It is said that you are hardly unfriendly,and I too dream of holding you.Here is my only piece of silver.The peddler will sell you perfumed soap,a comb, a mirror – what do I know?But by my neck, I’ll bring you a red scarffrom Demnat if you want.What do I need, son of the high pasture,with a piece of silver or silk scarf?Then tell me what you want –to marry me? What do you think,pretty girl of the village below?You make me laugh, son of the high pasture.I don’t care about money or a scarf,and even less about marriage.I expect from youwhat you expect from me.And satisfied, we will leave each other.What I want, strong son of the high pasture,what I want is the shelter of this bush,where you will lie on my breasts – which I holdout to you – and in a momenthappiness sweeter than milk,while my eyes lose themselves in the sky. (514)
